Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Summary: The Examination Department of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), through its announcement dated 9 October 2026, has invited eligible members to apply for empanelment as observers at examination centres for the January 2027 Chartered Accountants examinations, including the Advanced ICITSS Test. The Intermediate examinations are scheduled for 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12 January 2027, while the Foundation examinations are scheduled for 3, 5, 7 and 9 January 2027. The Examination Committee has prescribed a cooling-off period of one attempt after three consecutive attempts of observership duties. Applicants must be no older than 65 on 21 October 2026, have been on the Register of Members since 1 July 2024, and satisfy the announcement’s conditions relating to relatives, coaching, disciplinary matters and institutional positions. Observers receive an honorarium of ₹5,000 per day or session and ₹500 per day towards conveyance. Their duties include overseeing question-paper handling, conducting random identity checks and submitting reports after examinations. Members are assigned duties in the city recorded as their professional address. Online empanelment opens on 21 October 2026 and closes on 20 November 2026. Self-selection assignment details are tentatively expected in the last week of December 2026. The announcement provides extensive region-wise examination-city lists and zone-wise area descriptions covering the Western, Southern, Eastern, Central and Northern regions. It also sets out reporting responsibilities and possible disciplinary consequences for non-compliance. The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (Set up by an ACt of Parliment) Examination Department The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 9th October 2026 ANNOUNCEMENT EMPANELMENT OF MEMBERS TO ACT AS OBSERVERS AT THE EXAMINATION CENTRES FOR THE CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS’ EXAMINATIONS, JANUARY 2027. It is proposed to empanel members to act as Observers for the forthcoming Chartered Accountants Examinations JANUARY 2027 (including Advanced ICITSS Test) scheduled to be held as under: Intermediate Examination 2nd, 4th, 6th 8th, 10th & 12th January 2027 Foundation Examination 3rd, 5th, 7th, & 9th January 2027 Kindly note that, the Examination Committee in its 648th Meeting held on 8th and 9th MAY 2024 among others has decided that there should be a cooling off period for one attempt after (3) three consecutive attempts for Observership duties. 1. Eligibility Criteria for Empanelment: Members who fulfill the following criteria are eligible for empanelment, to act as Observers. i. He/she should not be more than 65 years of age as on the date of empanelment, i.e.,21st October 2026. ii. His/her name should have been borne on the Register of Members as on 1st July 2024 and continues to be so. iii. Neither he/she nor his/her relatives* or dependent* is / will be appearing in the ensuing Chartered Accountants Examinations, January 2027 in any examination centers in India or Abroad. [* the term “relative” or “dependent” for the purpose shall include, in relation to an individual, the wife, husband, son, daughter-in-law, daughter, son-in-law, grandson, granddaughter, brother, brother’s wife, brother’s son, brother’s daughter, sister, sister’s husband, sister’s son, sister’s daughter, wife’s brother, wife’s sister and husband’s brother and husband’s sister] i. He/she is not coaching students for any of the examinations / test conducted by the Council of the Institute in any institutions / organization including Regional Councils / Branches of the Institute and also private coaching. ii. He/she has not been convicted by any court of Law and no disciplinary proceedings are pending against him/her, either by the ICAI / Disciplinary Directorate or by any other organization, both in India and abroad. iii. He/she is not associated with the Institute as an elected/co-opted member of the Council / Regional Council / Managing Committee of any Branch of the ICAI. iv. He/she shall abide by the Guidelines for Observer and / or any other instructions. 2. Honorarium The honorarium of ₹ 5000/- per day / per session and ₹ 500/- as conveyance reimbursement per day (to cover cost of local travel) for all cities will be paid. 3. Duties of Observer: A member will be allotted duties in the city of his professional address only as per Institute’s records. (To avoid any hardship in allotment of Observer assignment, Members are advised to update their professional Address / City in ICAI through the SSP Portal in accordance with the examination cities, if not updated) The main duty of the observer is to ensure that (I) The Question Paper Packets meant for the day of the exam, with the right code of the day are collected from the bank (where they are kept under safe custody) opened and distributed to the candidates. (II) Checking the authenticity/ identity of the candidates with attendance register on random basis without disturbing them in writing their Examination to introduce the element of surprise checking. Accordingly, Observer is required to be present in the assigned branch of the Bank/Examination Centre from the time when the code key is opened in the bank till the conclusion of the examination, i.e. till the answer books are pooled, reconciled, packed and handed over to the designated courier agency (including answer sheet of physically handicapped candidates, if any) for dispatch to the Examination Department. Once the duties are assigned for acting as an Observer in a particular examination centre, he/she should attend to the said assignment and submit his/her report on daily basis in the prescribed format at the Portal immediately after the conclusion of exam. Bill is required to be submitted immediately after completion of all the Examination. In case any member is unable to perform his / her assignment, the same may be declined in the portal and communicated to the Examination Department well in advance, so that alternative arrangements can be made. If a member neither informs the Examination Department nor discharges the duties assigned, he/she would be liable for such action under the provisions of the Chartered Accountants Act 1949 and the Regulations framed thereunder, as deemed fit. Kindly note that giving false/misleading declaration regarding conflict of interest / involvement in coaching and any unauthorized absence from the Exam Centre during the exams will lead to action under disciplinary provisions in accordance with the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 and the Rules and Regulations framed thereunder. 4. How to Empanel: A member who fulfills the above-mentioned eligibility criteria, desirous of empaneling himself / herself for the assignment, may do so, online at http://observers.icaiexam.icai.org. Applications by any other mode will not be entertained. The activity schedule of the portal is as under: Opening of the window for empanelment 21st October 2026 (Wednesday) Closing of the window for empanelment 20th November 2026 (Friday) Hosting of the details of Self Selection of Observer assignments Last Week of December (Tentative) 2026 5. Details of the cities for Chartered Accountants’ JANUARY 2027 Examinations (A) WESTERN REGION: (Covering States of Goa, Gujrat and Maharashtra and U. T. of Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu) CITY CITY CITY CITY Ahmedabad – I Ichalkaranji Mumbai – XII Rajkot Ahmedabad – II Jalgaon Mumbai – XIII Ratnagiri Ahmedabad – III Jalna Nadiad Sangli Ahmedabad – IV Jamnagar Nagpur – I Satara Ahmednagar Junagadh Nagpur – II Sindhudurg Akola Kolhapur Nagpur – III Solapur Amravati Khamgaon (Buldhana) Nanded Surat – I Anand Latur Nandurbar Surat – II Aurangabad – I Mapusa (Goa) Nashik – I Surendranagar Aurangabad – II Margao (Goa) Nashik – II Thane – I Badlapur Mehsana Navi Mumbai Thane – II Baramati Morbi Navsari Thane – III Beed Mumbai – I Palanpur Vadodara – I Bharuch Mumbai – II Palghar Vadodara – II Bhavnagar Mumbai – III Panvel Valsad Bhiwandi (Maharashtra) Mumbai – IV Parbhani Vapi Bhuj Mumbai – V Patan Vasai – I Chandrapur Mumbai – VI Pimpri-Chinchwad Vasai – II Dhule Mumbai – VII Porbandar Wardha Gandhidham Mumbai – VIII Pune – I Yavatmal Gandhinagar Mumbai – IX Pune – II Gondia Mumbai – X Pune – III Himatnagar Mumbai – XI Pune – IV – City Zones Areas Ahmedabad I Thaltej, Gurukul, Sola, Bopal, Bodakdev, Chandkheda, Gota, Vastrapur, Satellite and Memnagar II Navrangpura, Naran pura and Nava Vadaj III Shahibag, Paldi, Khanpur, Kalupur and Ellis Bridge IV Isanpur, Juhapura, Sarkhej, Naroda, Vasna, Maninagar and Ghodasar Aurangabad I North of Jalna Road II South of Jalna Road Mumbai I CST and Churchgate II Byculla and Mumbai Central III Dadar (East), Parel and Matunga IV Kurla and Sion V Ghatkopar and Vidyavihar VI Mulund and Bhandup VII Dadar (W) and Prabhadevi VIII Vile Parle (W), Andheri(W) and Jogeshwari (W) IX Vile Parle (E), Andheri(E) and Jogeshwari (E) X Malad (W) XI Malad (E) XII Kandivali (W), Borivali (W) and Dahisar (W) XIII Kandivali (East), Borivali (E) and Dahisar (E) Nagpur I Wardhman Nagar, Gandhi Bagh, Mahal and Nandanwan II Dharampeth, Bharat Nagar, Sitabuldi and Dhantoli III Hanuman Nagar, Manewada, Trimurti Nagar and Wardha Road Nashik I Nashik City, Pimpalgaon, Panchvati, Meri, Mhasarul, Gangapur Road, Cidco, Ambad and Satpur II Nashik Road, Upnagar, Odha Dwarka and Devlali Camp Pune I Katraj, Dhankawadi, Padmavati, Satara Road, Bibwewadi, Swargate, Sarasbaug and Sahakarnagar II Bhavani Peth, Rasta Peth, Nana Peth, Camp, Koregaon park, Kalyani Nagar, Nagar Road, Magarpatta, Hadapsar, Wanowarie, NIBM Road and Kondhwa III Paravati, Tilak Road, Sadashiv Peth, Shukrawar Peth, Ravivar Peth, Budhwar Peth, Laxmi Road, Dandekar Bridge, Shastri Road, Sinhagad Road, Null Stop, F.C. Road, S.B. Road, Shivaji Nagar, Shaniwar Peth, Law College Road, Mangalwar Peth and Somwar Peth IV Kothrud, Karve Nagar, Vanaj, Chandni Chowk, Pashan, Aundh, Baner and Wakad Surat I Ring Road, Bhatar, Vesu, Piplod, Athwalines, Althan, Adajan, Rander, Ghod Dod Road, Nanpura, Magdalla and Dumas Road II Varachha, Mota Varachha, Kamrej, Sarthana, Katargam, Parvat Patia, Amroli, Dabholi, Ved Road, Singanpore and Sumul Dairy Road Thane I Thane City and Kalwa II Dombivili and Kalyan III Ulhasnagar and Ambernath Vadodara I Raopura, Ajwa-Waghodia Road, Karelibaug, Sama, Fatehgunj and Makarpura II Sayajigunj, Alkapuri, Akota, Vasna, Gorwa and Gotri Vasai I Mira Road and Bhayander II Vasali Nallasopara and Virar (B) SOUTHERN REGION: (Covering States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and U. Ts. of Lakshadweep and Pondicherry) CITY CITY CITY CITY Adilabad Davangere Khammam Shimoga Adoor Dharmapuri Kolar Sirsi Alappuzha Dindigul Kollam (Quilon) Sivakasi Anantapur Eluru Koppal Srikakulam Bagalkot Ernakulam Kottayam Thanjavur Belgaum Erode Kozhikode Theni Bellary Gadag Kumbakonam Thiruvananthapuram Bengaluru – I Guntur Kurnool Thrissur Bengaluru – II Hassan Madurai Tiruchirapalli Bengaluru – III Haveri Mahbubnagar Tirunelveli Bengaluru – IV Hosur Malappuram Tirupati Bengaluru – V Hubli Mandya Tirupur Bengaluru – VI Hyderabad – I Mangalore Tiruvallur Bengaluru – VII Hyderabad – II Mysore Tiruvannamalai Bengaluru – VIII Hyderabad – III Nagapattinam Tumakuru Chennai – I Hyderabad – IV Nagercoil Tuticorin Chennai – II Idukki Nalgonda Udupi Chennai – III Kadapa Namakkal Vellore Chennai – IV Kakinada Nellore Vijayapura Chennai – V Kalaburgi (Gulbarga, Karnataka) Nizamabad Vijayawada Chennai – VI Kalpetta Ongole Villupuram Chennai – VII Kancheepuram Palakkad (Palghat) Visakhapatnam Chennai – VIII Kannur Pondicherry (Puducherry) Vizianagaram Chikkaballapur Karaikudi Pudukkottai Warangal Chitradurga Karimnagar Raichur Coimbatore Karur Rajamahendravaram Cuddalore Kasaragod Salem – City Zones Areas I Banashankari 1st Stage, Banashankari 2nd Stage, Basavangudi, Chamarajpete and Jayanagar II JP Nagar, Kanakpura Road and Vasanthapura III K.R Puram, Indiranagar, Jeevan Bheemanagar and Bengaluru Ramamurthy Nagar IV Yelahanka, RT Nagar, Hebbal Kempepura and Ganga Nagar V Mission Road, Richmond Road, Racecourse Road, Benson Town and MG Road VI Malleshwaram, Rajaji Nagar, Sheshadripuram, Magadi Road, Basaveshwaranagar and Vijaynagar VII Kengeri Satelite Town, Rajarajeshwari Nagar, Nagarbhavi, Ullal and Sundakatte VIII Soldevanahalli and Jalahalli Chennai I George Town, Broadway, Royapuram, Washermanpet and Tondiarpet II Nungambakkam, Gopalapuram and Triplicane III Guindy, Adyar, Besant Nagar and Tirunvanmiyur IV Royapettah, Mylapore and Mandeveli V Arumbakkam, Anna Nagar, Kilpauk, Ambattur and Villivakkam VI Kodambakkam, T Nagar, West Mambalam and Saidapet VII Vadapalani, Ashok Nagar, K K Nagar and Porur VIII St. Thomas Mount, Pallavaram, Nanganallur, Chromepet and Tambaram Hyderabad I Koti, Abids, Nampally, Charminar, Himayatnagar, Malakpet, Narayanaguda, Chikkadapalli, Nallakunta, Vidya Nagar, Domalaguda, Basheerbagh, L.B. Nagar, Gunfoundry, Baghlingampally and Begum Bazar II Secunderabad, West & East Maredpalli, Uppal, Malkajgiri, Tarnaka, Safilguda, Sainikpuri, A S Rao Nagar, Alwal, Osmania University area and Ramanthapur III Begumpet, Ameerpet, Khairatabad, Banjara Hills, Jubilee Hills, Masab Tank, Mehdipatnam, S R Nagar, VengalaRao Nagar and Rajendra Nagar IV Sanathnagar, Kukatpally, Erragadda, Qutbullapur, Miyapur, Nizampet, Bachupally, Chanda Nagar, Serilingampally, Gachibowli, Patancheruvu, IDPL X Road and Chintal (C) EASTERN REGION: (Covering States of Northeast States, Manipur, Orissa, West Bengal and U.T. of Andaman & Nicobar Islands) CITY CITY CITY CITY Agartala Dimapur (Nagaland) Kolkata – I Rayagada Aizawl (Mizoram) Durgapur Kolkata – II Rourkela Asansol Gangtok Kolkata – III Sambalpur Balangir Guwahati Kolkata – IV Shillong Balasore Hooghly Kolkata – V Silchar Berhampur (Brahmapur) (Odisha) Imphal Kolkata – VI Siliguri Bhubaneswar Jharsuguda Port Blair Tezpur (Assam) Cuttack Jorhat Puri Tinsukia Dibrugarh Kharagpur Raniganj – City Zones Areas Kolkata / Howrah I Dunlop, Sinthee, Cossipore, Tala, Shyambazar, Bagbazar, Shovabazar, Jorasanko, Kumartuli, Burrabazar, Posta, Chitpur, Belgachia, Dumdum and Madhyamgram II Dalhousie, Lal bazar, Bowbazar, Janbazar, Taltala, Entally, College Square, Raja bazar, Sealdah, Beliaghata, Phoolbagan, Kankurgachi, Maniktala, Ultadanga, Salt Lake and Newtown III Chowringhee, Park Street, Bhowanipore, Ballygunge, Garfa, Haltu, Kasba, Topsia, East Kolkata Township (EKT), Anandapur, Kalikapur, Panchasayar and Mukundapur IV Dhakuria, Jadavpur, Santoshpur, Bijoygarh, Regent Estate, New Alipore, Tollygunge, South City, Golf Green, Regent Park, Garia, Ranikuthi, Naktala, Bansdroni, Poddarnagar and Kudghat V Diamond Harbour Road, Behala, Taratala, Barisha, Parnashree Pally, Sarsuna, Khidirpur, Metiabruz, Garden Reach, Ekbalpur and BNR Colony VI Howrah (D) CENTRAL REGION: (Covering States of Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, M.P., Rajasthan, Uttarakhand and U.P.) CITY CITY CITY CITY Agra Deoghar Khandwa Ramgarh Ajmer Dhanbad Khargone (M. P.) Ranchi Aligarh Durg Kishangarh Ratlam Alwar Firozabad Korba Rewa Ayodhya (U. P.) Gaya Kota Sagar Balotra Ghaziabad Lucknow I Saharanpur Banswara Gorakhpur Lucknow II Samastipur Bareilly Gwalior Lucknow III Satna Beawar Haldwani Madhubani Sikar Begusarai Hanumangarh (Rajasthan) Mandsaur Sirohi Bhagalpur Hapur (U. P.) Mathura Sitamarhi Bharatpur Haridwar Meerut Siwan Bhilwara Hazaribagh Modinagar (U. P.) Sriganganagar Bhiwadi (Rajasthan) Indore – I Moradabad Udaipur Bhopal – I Indore – II Motihari Ujjain Bhopal – II Indore – III Muzaffarnagar Varanasi Bikaner Jabalpur Muzaffarpur Bilaspur Jaipur – I Nagaur Bokaro steel city Jaipur – II Neemuch Bulandshahr Jaipur – III Noida Bundi Jaipur – IV Pali-Marwar Burhanpur Jamshedpur Patna Chhatarpur Jhansi Prayagraj Chhindwara Jhunjhunu Purnea Chittorgarh Jodhpur Raigarh (Chhattisgarh) Churu Kanpur Raipur Darbhanga Kashipur Rajnandgaon Dehradun Katni Rajsamand – City Zones Areas Bhopal I Shamla Hills, Jahangirabad, Hamidiya Road, Rayal Market, Malviya Nagar, T.T.Nagar, New Market, Jawaharchok, P & T Colony, Neelbad, Ratibad, Karond, Jumerati, Nishatpura, Indrapuri, Shubhash Nagar, Rachna Nagar, Kasturba Nagar, M.P. Nagar, Govindpura, Aishbagh, Kabirpura, Kolar, Misrod, Piplani, Arera Colony, Anand Nagar, Minal Residency, Sakti Nagar, Habibganj and Awadhpuri II Gandhi Nagar, Airport Road, Lalghati, Sehore, Phanda, Khajuri, Krishna Nagar, Sanjeev Nagar, Santi Nagar, Kuravar, Chandukhedi, Kohefiza, Halalpura, Abbas Nagar, Moti Masjid and Idgah hill Indore I Vijay Nagar, Nanda Nagar, MIG/LIG Colony, Patnipura, Scheme No.54, Scheme No.74, Scheme No.78, Shalimar Township, Mahalaxmi Nagar, Tilak Nagar, Kanadia Road, Saket, Telephone Nagar, Goyal Nagar, Bengali Square, Khajrana, Dewas Naka, Malviya Nagar and Nehru Nagar II Chawni, South Tukoganj, Geeta Bhavan, Chhoti Gwal Toli, MTH Compound, Sneh Nagar, Kanchan Bag, Bhawankuwa, M.Y. Hospital Road, RNT Marg, Malwa Mill, Janjir Wala Square, Nasia Road, Naulakha, Sapna Sangeeta, Khatiwala Tank, Palsikar Colony, Sanchar Nagar, Agrawak Nagar, Juni Indore, Jail Road, Joara Compound, Rajwada, Devas and Mhow III Rajendra Nagar, Annapuran Road, Vaishali Nagar, Gumasta Nagar, Sudama Nagar, Usha Nagar, Raj Mohalla, Mahesh Nagar, Bada Ganpati, Aerodrome Road, Kalani Nagar, Gandhi Nagar, Banganga, Marimata Chouraha and Lokymanya Nagar Jaipur I Sikar Road, Vidhyadhar Nagar, Jhotwara, Ambabari, Shastri Nagar, Bani Park, Murlipura and VKI Area II Ajmer Road, Sirsi Road, Vaishali Nagar, Sodala, Civil Lines, Shyam Nagar, Khatipura Road, New Sanganer Road, Chitrakoot, Narman Nagar, Gurjar Ki Thadi and Baid Godam III Tonk Road, Malviya Nagar, Pratap Nagar, Jagatpura, Gopalpura Byepass, Mansarover and Bapu Nagar IV Agra Road, Old City, Jawahar Nagar, Adarsh Nagar, Transport Nagar, Sethi Nagar, Rajapark and C Scheme I Saadatganj, Balaganj, Daliganj, Shahganj, Kakori, Shekpur ,Habibpur, Rajajipuram, Dubagga, Daulatganj, Fazullaganj, Yahuyaganj, Wazirganj, Vasant Kunj, Triveni nagar, Thakurganj, Sarfarazganj, Asharfabad, Bhaisamau, Hasainganj, Husainabad, Jankipuram, Para, Preeti Nagar, Qaiserbagh, Khadra, Madiyanva, Madwana, Malihabad, Mohibullapur, Mubarakpur, Nishatganj and Nirala Nagar Lucknow II Alambagh, Singar Nagar, Krishna Nagar, Transport Nagar, Amausi, CCS Airport, Mawaiya, Durgapuri, Aminabad, Husain Ganj, Sachivalaya, Hazratganj, IT chauraha, Badshah Nagar, Bhoothnath Market, Lekhraj Market, Munshipulia, Ashiyana, Krishna Nagar, Aminabad, Aishbagh, Contonment, Sadar, Tiwaripur, Teli bagh, Sarojini Nagar, Sharda Nagar, Alinagar Sonhara, Bangla Bazar, Bijnor, Civi lines, Purseni, Rudrawara colony, Kanausi, Kasimpur, Viruha, Kathigera, Khujauli, Kumhrava, Lalbagh, Lalkuan, LDA colony, Makaria Kalan, Maunda, Nadarganj and Naka Hindola III Chinnhat, Golf city, Vibhuti khand, Vikas nagar, Vijay khand, Vrindavan Yojna, Vikas Nagar, Uattardhona, Takrohi, Tera Khas, Sanjay Gandhi puram, Sivaji puram, Adil nagar, Ahmamau, Alamnagar, Arjunganj, Aurangabad, Jagir anora kala, Bagiamau, Bakshi ka talab, Banthra, Sikanderpur, Barel, Bharavara, Devariya, Dhaurmau, Faridi nagar, Indira Nagar, Itaunja, Palia, Rabindra palli, Kalli pashchim, Kalyanpur, Kamta, Khurram nagar, Lonapur, Mahanagar, Matiyari, Mohanlalganj, Naubasta Kala, Sarojini Nagar and Sivlar (E) NORTHERN REGION: (Covering States of Haryana, H.P., Punjab and U.T. of Chandigarh, Delhi, J & K, and Ladakh) CITY CITY CITY CITY Ambala Delhi / New Delhi – V Jind Patiala Amritsar Delhi / New Delhi – VI Kaithal Rewari Bahadurgarh (Haryana) Delhi / New Delhi – VII Karnal Rohtak Bathinda Delhi / New Delhi – VIII Kurukshetra Sangrur Bhiwani (Haryana) Faridabad Ludhiana Shimla Chandigarh Fatehabad Mandi Gobindgarh Sirsa Delhi / New Delhi – I Gurgaon (Gurugram) Narnaul Sonepat Delhi / New Delhi – II Hisar Palwal (Haryana) Srinagar (J&K) Delhi / New Delhi – III Jalandhar Panipat Yamunanagar Delhi / New Delhi – IV Jammu Pathankot – City Zones Areas Delhi/ New Delhi I Karol Bagh, Pusa Road, Patel Nagar and Kirti Nagar II Pitampura and Rohini III Paschim Vihar and Punjabi Bagh IV Nizamuddin, Lajpat Nagar, Lodi Road and Kalkaji V Geeta Colony, Priyadarshani Vihar, Karkardooma, Vivek Vihar and I.P. Extension VI Vasundhara Enclave, Mayur Vihar and Anand Vihar VII Kingsway Camp, Darya Ganj, Shalimar Bagh and Sarup Nagar VIII Janakpuri, Dwarka and Vikaspuri The members are advised to note the above and stay in touch with the website of the Institute, www.icai.org (CA. ANAND KUMAR CHATURVEDI) ADDITIONAL SECRETARY (EXAMINATIONS) Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Filed under EmpanelmentICAIICAI empanelment Join TaxGuru's Network for the latest updates on Income Tax, GST, Company Law, Corporate Laws and other related subjects. Join Our WhatsApp Group Join Our Telegram Group Review us on Google Related Articles in CA, CS, CMA Two Letters, One Responsibility – Are We Protecting Value of “CA” in Bank Audits? October 9, 2026 ICAI Board Can Close Misconduct Complaint on Plausible View: Delhi HC October 7, 2026 Tax Technology Transformation: How Automating Compliance Protects CFOs from Audit Risks October 7, 2026 ICSI Merit-cum-Means Assistance Scheme 2026: Apply by 25 November October 7, 2026 Analysis of Notifications and Circulars for Week Ending 4th October 2026 October 7, 2026 Analysis of Notifications and Circulars for Week Ending 27th September 2026 October 5, 2026