Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Premier Energies Limited, a prominent player in the Indian solar manufacturing sector, has announced the acquisition of new orders worth ₹4,001 crore for the second quarter of the fiscal year 2027. The orders, which span the July to September period, originate from a diverse array of clients, including major power producers, module manufacturers, and engineering, procurement, and construction (EPC) companies. The orders comprise a combination of solar cell and module supplies totalling 2,308 MW, as well as EPC project execution. Notably, these figures do not include orders from the retail market segment. The influx of orders is a testament to Premier Energies’ robust growth trajectory, bolstered by recent expansions in its manufacturing capabilities. The company’s total module manufacturing capacity has nearly doubled to 11.1 GW, and its solar cell manufacturing capacity has seen a significant increase from 3.6 GW to 10.6 GW. This expansion follows the commissioning of a 7 GW TOPCon solar cell manufacturing facility in Naidupeta, Andhra Pradesh, last month. Chiranjeev Saluja, Managing Director of Premier Energies, expressed confidence in the company’s strategic direction, stating, “Our growing order book is a strong validation of our growth strategy and execution ability. The Indian solar market is extremely demanding with customers looking for scale, bankability, and the latest technology. As India’s largest integrated solar manufacturer, we are ready to serve the needs of customers across market segments.” Premier Energies, with over three decades of solar manufacturing expertise, is renowned for its commitment to technological innovation and sustainability. The company is currently setting up a 10 GW ingot-wafer manufacturing capacity for backward integration and a 12 GWh battery container manufacturing capacity to diversify its product offerings. Analysts view the company’s strategic expansions and robust order book as pivotal in maintaining its competitive edge in the rapidly evolving solar industry. Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Filed under NSE Join TaxGuru's Network for the latest updates on Income Tax, GST, Company Law, Corporate Laws and other related subjects. Join Our WhatsApp Group Join Our Telegram Group Review us on Google Related Articles in Business Persistent Systems secures strong majority stake in Nagarro October 9, 2026 Canara HSBC Life Insurance reports robust growth in H1 FY27 with strong VNB performance October 9, 2026 Starlink India Row: Musk Targets Ambani, Government Cites Security Concerns October 9, 2026 Lupin secures U.S. FDA approval for Phytonadione Injectable Emulsion October 8, 2026 US Freezes Green Card Applications of Infosys, TCS, Wipro, HCL and Cognizant: Latest Developments October 8, 2026 JSW Steel reports 7.27 million tonnes of crude steel production in Q2 FY27 October 8, 2026