Case Law Details TaxGuru Citation 2026 taxguru.in 15267 Case Name VIM Null Gruoup Vs Additional Commissioner (Lucknow GSTAT) Appeal Number Only available for paid members Date of Judgement/Order Only available for paid members Courts GSTAT, Lucknow GSTAT Upgrade to Premium to download. Already Upgraded? Log in. Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); VIM Null Gruoup Vs Additional Commissioner (Lucknow GSTAT) Summary: The GST Appellate Tribunal, Lucknow, allowed the appeal of the appellant described in the cause title as VLM NULL GRUOUP and in the substantive order as M/s VLM Group, setting aside an appellate order that had upheld a ₹63,72,000 penalty for transporting machinery without generating the mandatory e-invoice before movement. The Maharashtra partnership firm manufactured and supplied machinery, including FFS and BFS machines. Its consignment of four FFS machines and parts, supplied to M/s Jedux Parenteral Pvt. Ltd., Barabanki, had an invoice value of ₹2,08,86,000 inclusive of IGST of ₹31,86,000. When the vehicle was intercepted on 6 October 2024, the driver produced a tax invoice, E-Way Bill and LR/Bilty, all dated 3 October 2024. However, the invoice lacked the prescribed IRN/QR Code, and the e-invoice had not been generated. The proper officer imposed a penalty equivalent to 200% of IGST, which the appellant paid on 10 October 2024 to secure release of the goods and vehicle. The First Appellate Authority subsequently upheld the penalty through an ex-parte order. The appellant admitted the initial omission but submitted that the e-invoice was generated on 8 October 2024 at 18:27 hours and produced before the authorities, that the transaction was traceable through the transport documents, and that no discrepancy or intention to evade tax existed. The Department maintained that e-invoicing under Rule 48(4) was independently mandatory and that subsequent generation could not retrospectively cure transportation without the prescribed invoice. The Tribunal accepted that later generation did not obliterate the initial statutory lapse, but considered it relevant to determining whether the transaction involved deliberate suppression or a procedural failure. It found that the supplier, recipient, goods, value, tax liability and transport details were identifiable, and that no fabricated invoice, false E-Way Bill, mismatch, undervaluation, fictitious party or manipulation of the subsequent electronic record had been established. Applying the principles discussed in Nancy Trading Company, Kumar Cargo Solution, Hindustan Herbal Cosmetics and Hindustan Steel Ltd., the Tribunal held that the initial e-invoicing lapse could not, in these circumstances, conclusively establish an intention to evade tax. Payment during detention also could not by itself be treated as an admission of fraud. It further held that the First Appellate Authority should have considered the subsequent e-invoice, supporting documents, absence of discrepancies and judicial authorities. The appeal was allowed with consequential relief in accordance with law. Any ₹63,72,000 deposited was directed to be dealt with subject to verification of payment records and compliance with the applicable statutory procedure. Cases Discussed M/s Kumar Cargo Solution v. State of U.P. and 3 Others, Writ Tax No. 1201 of 2024, decided on 01.08.2024 (Allahabad High Court, Division Bench) — Relied upon by the Tribunal as materially comparable; the finding of intention to evade tax was unsupported by the factual matrix. The Department sought to confine the decision to its particular facts. Nancy Trading Company v. State of U.P., Writ Tax No. 892 of 2023, decided on 15.07.2024 (Allahabad High Court) — Relied upon by the appellant and the Tribunal regarding absence of a specific finding of mens rea for tax evasion where transport documents supported the transaction; the Department submitted that the ruling was fact-specific. M/s Hindustan Herbal Cosmetics v. State of U.P. and 2 Others, Writ Tax No. 1400 of 2019 (Allahabad High Court) — Relied upon by the Tribunal for the requirement of material establishing intention to evade tax before imposing a penalty under Section 129. Karmaxx Infotech v. Assistant Commissioner, W.P. No. 18311 of 2023, decided on 20.06.2023 (Madras High Court) — Referred to by the First Appellate Authority concerning failure to respond or participate in proceedings; the Tribunal nevertheless required consideration of the material relevant to the penalty dispute. Hindustan Steel Ltd. v. State of Odisha (Supreme Court of India) — Relied upon by the Tribunal for judicial exercise of penalty discretion and the principle that penalty should not ordinarily follow a technical or venial breach merely because its imposition is lawful. Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Filed under Goods And Services TaxGSTGSTAT Author Info Name: CA Sandeep Kanoi Qualification: CA in Job / Business Company: Taxguru Consultancy Location: Mumbai, Maharashtra Articles Published: 21,471 View full profile → More from CA Sandeep Kanoi Paper Business Demerger Scheme Advances to Shareholder and Creditor Meetings: NCLT Allahabad October 9, 2026 Assessment Order Does Not Bar Section 119(2)(b) Condonation: Gujarat HC October 9, 2026 Delhi HC Slams 30-Year Locker Seizure, Directs AO to Implement ITAT Order October 9, 2026 Join TaxGuru's Network for the latest updates on Income Tax, GST, Company Law, Corporate Laws and other related subjects. Join Our WhatsApp Group Join Our Telegram Group Review us on Google Related Articles in Goods and Services Tax Section 74 SCN Must Specify Fraud Allegations Supported by Facts: Himachal Pradesh HC October 9, 2026 GST Cannot Be Deducted From Land Acquisition Compensation by State: Karnataka HC October 9, 2026 Identical GST Appeal Orders Without Independent Reasons Set Aside by GSTAT Raipur October 9, 2026 GST Appeal Cannot Be Rejected for Further Pre-Deposit When Entire Tax Is Paid: HC October 9, 2026 Personal Hearing Mandatory Before Adverse GST Order: Delhi HC October 9, 2026 GST Cancellation Order Flawed for Ignoring Request to Produce Evidence: Gujarat HC October 9, 2026