Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Persistent Systems Limited has successfully secured a strong majority stake in Nagarro SE, a move that marks a significant milestone in its strategic expansion. The Pune-based IT services company, through its wholly-owned subsidiary Galaxy Germany Holding SE, announced the completion of its voluntary public takeover offer for Nagarro, a global leader in digital engineering and technology solutions. The takeover offer, which concluded on October 6, 2026, saw a substantial 94.04% of Nagarro’s share capital and voting rights tendered, significantly surpassing the minimum acceptance threshold of 50% plus one share. This includes a 22.10% stake previously acquired from Lantano Beteiligungen GmbH. Persistent’s CEO, Sandeep Kalra, expressed that the overwhelming acceptance of the offer underscores the strategic rationale behind the merger, aimed at creating a leading global AI-led digital engineering entity. Persistent plans to initiate a squeeze-out of the remaining minority shareholders of Nagarro, having secured over 90% of its share capital and voting rights. However, the company has yet to finalise this decision and will disclose further details in due course. The transaction is anticipated to close by the end of the first quarter of the calendar year 2027, pending a limited number of regulatory approvals. Market analysts view this acquisition as a strategic move for Persistent, enhancing its capabilities in digital engineering and expanding its global footprint. The successful takeover of Nagarro, known for its expertise in technology solutions, positions Persistent favourably in the competitive IT services landscape. The market will be closely watching how Persistent integrates Nagarro’s operations and leverages its strengths to drive growth and innovation in the digital engineering sector. Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Filed under NSE Join TaxGuru's Network for the latest updates on Income Tax, GST, Company Law, Corporate Laws and other related subjects. Join Our WhatsApp Group Join Our Telegram Group Review us on Google Related Articles in Business Canara HSBC Life Insurance reports robust growth in H1 FY27 with strong VNB performance October 9, 2026 Starlink India Row: Musk Targets Ambani, Government Cites Security Concerns October 9, 2026 Lupin secures U.S. FDA approval for Phytonadione Injectable Emulsion October 8, 2026 US Freezes Green Card Applications of Infosys, TCS, Wipro, HCL and Cognizant: Latest Developments October 8, 2026 JSW Steel reports 7.27 million tonnes of crude steel production in Q2 FY27 October 8, 2026 TCS reports robust Q2 growth with strategic partnerships and AI revenue boost October 8, 2026