Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Canara HSBC Life Insurance Company Limited has announced its unaudited financial results for the half-year ending 30th September 2026, showcasing a solid performance amidst a dynamic economic landscape. The Board of Directors approved the results, highlighting significant growth across various financial metrics and reinforcing the company’s strategic focus on traditional products and protection offerings. For the first half of the fiscal year 2027, Canara HSBC Life Insurance reported a notable increase in its Individual Weighted Premium Income (WPI), which reached ₹1,117 crore, marking a year-on-year growth of 14.5%. The New Business Premium Income also saw a rise, amounting to ₹1,984 crore, a 16.1% increase compared to the previous year. The company’s Value of New Business (VNB) grew by 24% year-on-year, reaching ₹266 crore, with a VNB margin of 21.3%, underscoring the company’s focus on disciplined execution and profitable growth. The company’s protection business demonstrated remarkable growth, with a 44% year-on-year increase, contributing to 10.5% of the total Annualised Premium Equivalent (APE). Additionally, the company’s Assets Under Management (AUM) grew by 14% year-on-year, reaching ₹50,200 crore as of 30th September 2026. The Embedded Value (EV) stood at ₹7,622 crore, with an operating Return on Embedded Value (RoEV) of 19.8% on a rolling 12-month basis. Anuj Mathur, MD & CEO of Canara HSBC Life Insurance, expressed satisfaction with the company’s performance, attributing the growth to the resilience of traditional segments’ demand and the company’s strategic focus on customer-centric solutions. He highlighted the company’s continued momentum in credit life and annuity streams, reinforcing its strategy of building a balanced and diversified portfolio aligned with customers’ protection, savings, and retirement needs. The company’s performance reflects its commitment to enhancing transparency and customer outcomes, aligning with proposed regulatory reforms. Analysts view the robust growth in VNB and the strong performance in protection business as positive indicators of the company’s strategic direction and operational efficiency. As the insurance sector continues to evolve, Canara HSBC Life Insurance remains focused on leveraging its strong distribution network and customer-focused approach to create enduring value for its stakeholders. Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Filed under NSE Join TaxGuru's Network for the latest updates on Income Tax, GST, Company Law, Corporate Laws and other related subjects. Join Our WhatsApp Group Join Our Telegram Group Review us on Google Related Articles in Business Starlink India Row: Musk Targets Ambani, Government Cites Security Concerns October 9, 2026 Lupin secures U.S. FDA approval for Phytonadione Injectable Emulsion October 8, 2026 US Freezes Green Card Applications of Infosys, TCS, Wipro, HCL and Cognizant: Latest Developments October 8, 2026 JSW Steel reports 7.27 million tonnes of crude steel production in Q2 FY27 October 8, 2026 TCS reports robust Q2 growth with strategic partnerships and AI revenue boost October 8, 2026 TP Solar achieves significant production milestones in Q2 FY27 October 8, 2026