Frequently asked questions (FAQs) The frequently asked questions (FAQs) for the SEBI Investor Awareness Test (Level 1) typically cover various aspects of the exam, including eligibility criteria, registration process, exam pattern, syllabus, passing marks, and other relevant details. Here's a list of FAQs for the SEBI Investor Awareness Test: 1.What is the SEBI Investor Awareness Test (Level 1) ? Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) in association with National Institute of Securities Markets (NISM) has introduced this examination with an aim of fostering Financial Literacy and Investor awareness among the Investment public. This initiative seeks to empower individuals with essential knowledge about basic concepts of savings and Investment. By equipping potential investors with the necessary skills and insights, the regulator aims to enhance financial literacy and promote informed decision-making. This exam aims to empower prospective investors, enabling them to make informed choices and navigate the complexities of financial markets effectively. 2.Who can take the SEBI Investor Awareness Test (Level 1)? Anyone who is keen on learning about the Indian Financial Markets may take the exam. There is no eligibility requirement with regards to age as well as educational qualification to take the SIAT exam. 3.How can I register for the SEBI Investor Awareness Test (Level 1)? To register for SEBI Investor Awareness Test, candidate needs to fill in the Online Registration Form available at https://siat.nism.ac.in/. You need to click on “Register” and fill the following details at the time of Registration: 1.Full Name (SAME AS AADHAR) 2.Mobile number 3.Date of Birth 4.State 5.District 6.Highest Educational Qualification (Completed). 7.Category of Applicant : (options as per below) a) College Students (in case of college students, you will have below more fields, please select as applicable) • University Name (if not available in the drop down the select “Others”) • Partner Trainer (if not available in the dropdown then select “Self registered/No Trainer”) • Securities Market Partner. b) School Students (Upto Class 12) c) Professionals d) Service e) Business f) Others (Please Specify) 8. Email (Verify the email by Clicking on “Verify Email” button) 9.Aadhar number (Verify the Aadhar by Clicking on “Verify Aadhar” button) Once verified, click on “Submit” button. 4.How to proceed for the SEBI Investor Awareness Test (Level 1)? Once registered, candidate will receive an email with his/her login credentials. Using these login credentials, the candidate can log into https://siat.nism.ac.in/. and download the study material made available there. Your examination link will be activated instantly. The candidates can appear for the exam after Registration. 5.Can I retake the exam if I fail? If a candidate does not pass the exam in his/her first attempt, he/she can appear for another two times (using the same log-in credentials) – no time gap is required between these attempts. However, after the third Unsuccessful attempt (i.e., result is “Fail” on the third attempt also), a cooling off period of three months will be applicable from the date of last attempt to enable the candidate to prepare well and re-appear after this cooling off period. 6.What is the exam pattern and duration? The examination consists of a total of 25 Multiple Choice questions to be completed within a duration of 60 minutes. There is no negative marking in this exam. Passing mark for this exam is set as 10 marks (out of the total marks of 25) i.e., 40%. 7.What is the Fees structure of the SEBI Investor Awareness Test (Level 1)? The exam is free of cost. 8.How can I prepare for the exam? Study material can be download from the Portal (https://siat.nism.ac.in/.) using the login credentials received by you post-registration. Apart from the above study material, candidates shall go through the content available on the SEBI Investor Website (https://investor.sebi.gov.in/iematerial.html) 9.How can I get Exam Credentials? Candidates will receive the login credentials by email, immediately after their registration. If you do not find the email in your “Inbox” of your registered email account, please check your “Spam” folder as well. Please note that you can appear for the exam instantly after the registration and you can appear for the exam by clicking on the tab “Start Exam” in your SIAT portal (https://siat.nism.ac.in/). 10.Can I reschedule or cancel my exam enrolment? Once registered, candidates can appear for the exam at any time from the date of exam. Therefore, there is no need to reschedule this exam’s enrolment. 11.When, how and where I can appear for SEBI Investor Awareness Test (Level 1)? You can take the exam at your convenience, anytime and anywhere (after your registration), using either your desktop, or laptop, or Android mobile device. 12.What is the passing marks for the SEBI Investor Awareness Test (level 1)? In order to pass the exam, candidates need to achieve a minimum of 40% score (i.e., candidate shall score a minimum of 10 marks out of the total marks of 25). 13.When and how will I receive my certificate after passing the exam? Once submitted the exam, candidate will receive the certificate instantly under “Download Certificate” tab on the portal (https://siat.nism.ac.in/). You will also receive an email on your registered email id mentioning the marks scored by you in this exam. 14.Is there any negative marking in the exam? There is no negative marking in this exam. 15.What are the potential consequences when a candidate opens the exam link and accidentally/inadvertently closes it without appearing for the exam? In the event that a candidate opens the exam link and views at least one question before closing it, the system typically registers this action as the candidate having "appeared" for the exam. In case, you have inadvertently closed the window, please call on +91-8080806476 (NISM’s Certification Helpdesk) or send an email to certification@nism.ac.in to reset/unblock your exam. As per the current system, any incomplete exams will automatically reset at 8:00 AM the following day. 16.Can I appear for the examination in a vernacular language? Yes, candidates may choose to appear for the examination in English, Hindi, Marathi, Punjabi, Odia, Kannada. The preferred language can be selected by the candidate at the time of appearing for the examination.