Case Law Details TaxGuru Citation 2026 taxguru.in 15296 Case Name PCIT-4 Vs Mphasis Ltd. (Karnataka High Court) Appeal Number Only available for paid members Date of Judgement/Order Only available for paid members Courts All High Courts, Karnataka High Court Upgrade to Premium to download. Already Upgraded? Log in. Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); PCIT-4 Vs Mphasis Ltd. (Karnataka High Court) Summary: The Karnataka High Court dismissed the Income Tax Department’s appeal against Mphasis Ltd. for assessment year 2009-10, upholding the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal’s decision on two substantial questions of law. The first concerned depreciation at 60% on switches and routers amounting to Rs.98,11,575. The second concerned the deductibility of foreign exchange losses of Rs.26,31,35,000 arising from forward contracts, which the Revenue sought to characterise as speculative or notional losses under Section 43(5) of the Income Tax Act, 1961. Mphasis Ltd., engaged in software development services for its group companies, had filed its return declaring income of Rs.45,78,65,652. The assessment proceedings involved several disputed adjustments, including deductions under Sections 10B and 10AA relating to onsite software development subcontracted to associated enterprises, foreign currency expenditure, depreciation on networking equipment and foreign exchange losses. Following the Dispute Resolution Panel’s directions and the final assessment order, the assessee approached the Tribunal, which granted relief. The Revenue challenged that decision before the High Court, where the appeal was admitted on the two questions concerning depreciation and foreign exchange losses. On depreciation, the High Court followed the Delhi High Court’s decision in CIT v. BSES Yamuna Powers Ltd., which recognised that computer accessories and peripherals forming an integral part of a computer system qualify for the higher depreciation rate. Applying this principle, the Court held that switches and routers, which cannot be used without computers, form part of computer peripherals and are eligible for depreciation at 60%. The Revenue failed to controvert the Tribunal’s findings. Accordingly, the first substantial question of law was answered in favour of the assessee. Regarding foreign exchange losses, the Revenue argued that losses on forward contracts were contingent, notional and speculative. The Court examined the Bombay High Court’s decision in CIT v. D. Chetan & Co., which distinguished business-related hedging transactions from speculative activities. In the present case, the losses arose from restatement of debtors, creditors and book liabilities and included realised and unrealised components. The assessee had furnished details of foreign exchange gains and losses, while the Assessing Officer relied primarily on CBDT Instruction No. 3/2010 without establishing that the forward contracts were speculative or outside the ordinary course of business. The Court also relied upon the Supreme Court’s decision in CIT v. Woodward Governor India (P.) Ltd., recognising that exchange fluctuation losses can constitute deductible expenditure under Section 37(1), even where the liability has not actually been discharged by payment. Since the Revenue had not disputed the business character of the transactions or established speculative activity, the High Court held that the Tribunal correctly allowed the forward contract losses. Both substantial questions were decided against the Revenue, and the appeal was dismissed without costs. Cases Discussed CIT v. Mphasis Ltd. (Supreme Court; 2020; 113 taxmann.com 74): Cited by the assessee in support of its submissions concerning the earlier Mphasis litigation. CIT v. D. Chetan & Co. (Bombay High Court; 2016; 75 taxmann.com 300): Relied upon by the High Court in holding that foreign exchange forward contracts entered into for business hedging purposes are not necessarily speculative transactions and that the related losses are allowable. CIT v. Mphasis Ltd. (Karnataka High Court; 2016; 74 taxmann.com 274): Cited by the assessee among the authorities supporting its position. CIT v. Mphasis Software & Services India (P.) Ltd. (Karnataka High Court; 2015; 62 taxmann.com 165): Cited in connection with the assessee’s earlier dispute over deductions for software development activities. CIT v. BSES Yamuna Powers Ltd. (Delhi High Court; 2013; 40 taxmann.com 108): Followed by the High Court to allow depreciation at 60% on switches and routers forming an integral part of the computer system. CIT v. Woodward Governor India (P.) Ltd. (Supreme Court; 2009; 179 Taxman 326): Relied upon for the principle that exchange differences recognised at the balance-sheet date can constitute deductible expenditure under Section 37(1). ITO v. Samiran Majumdar (Kolkata ITAT; 2006; 98 ITD 119): Referred to in the quoted decision in BSES Yamuna Powers Ltd. concerning higher depreciation on computer peripherals. Expeditors International (India) (P.) Ltd. v. CIT (Delhi ITAT; 2008; 118 TTJ 652): Referred to in the quoted judgment concerning the eligibility of computer peripherals for higher depreciation. S. Vinodkumar Diamonds Pvt. Ltd. v. Addl. CIT (Mumbai ITAT; 2013; 59 SOT 124 / 35 taxmann.com 337): Discussed within the quoted Bombay High Court judgment as a decision concerning the speculative character of forward contracts on its particular facts. CIT v. Badridas Gauridu (P.) Ltd. (Bombay High Court; 2004; 134 Taxman 376): Referred to in the quoted judgment for the treatment of foreign exchange forward contracts undertaken to protect export business against currency fluctuations. M.P. Financial Corporation v. CIT (Madhya Pradesh High Court; 1987; 165 ITR 765): Referred to within the Supreme Court’s quoted reasoning concerning the scope of expenditure under Section 37. Madras Industrial Investment Corporation Ltd. v. CIT (Supreme Court; 225 ITR 802, as cited in the judgment): Referred to in the Supreme Court extract concerning the treatment of business expenditure and losses. FULL TEXT OF THE KARNATAKA HIGH COURT JUDGMENT The present appeal has been filed by the Income tax department under Section 260-A of the Income tax Act, 1961 against the order dated 9.8.2017 passed by the Income tax Appellate Tribunal, ‘A’ Bench, Bengaluru, in IT(TP)A. No.242/Bang/2014 for the assessment year 2009-10. 2. The facts of the case reveal that the respondent – assessee is a company duly incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 and is engaged in the business of providing software development services to its group of companies. It is a subsidiary of Mphasis group. The return of income for the assessment year 2009-10 was filed on 30.9.2009 declaring the total income of Rs.45,78,65,652/-. 3. The case of the assessee was selected for scrutiny and the assessing authority has disallowed the deduction under Section 10B of the Income tax Act, 1961 (‘the Act’ for short) in respect of two units claimed by the assessee for income from onsite-subcontract work given to its associated enterprises in its order passed under Section 143(3) r/w Section 144(C)(13) by holding that the above profit was not eligible for deduction and hence, disallowed the claim of deduction under Section 10B of the Act. 4. The assessee preferred an appeal before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (‘the Tribunal’ for short) as its objections were rejected by the DRP (Dispute Resolution Panel) and the Tribunal has allowed the appeal in part. 5. The draft assessment order was passed on 28.3.2013 inter alia proposing;- “a) reduction of the deduction claimed under Section 10B /10AA of the Act on the ground that: (i) The assesse is not entitled to claim deduction in respect of turnover relatable to onsite development of software sub-contracted by it to its Associate Enterprises (‘the AEs’ for short); (ii) The expenses incurred by the assessee in foreign currency having been incurred for providing technical services should be excluded from export turnover. (b) disallowance of depreciation claimed by the assessee at 60% on switches and routers on the ground that they are not parts and accessories of computers; and (c) disallowance of foreign exchange loss claimed by the assessee as a deduction on account of fluctuation in foreign exchange in respect forward contracts.” 6. The disallowances proposed by the assessing officer were confirmed by the Disputes Resolution Panel vide directions dated 30.12.2013 and finally the assessing officer has passed a final order incorporating the directions of the Dispute Resolution Panel on 30.3.2014. The assessee being aggrieved by the order passed by the assessment officer preferred an appeal before the Tribunal and the Tribunal, after taking into account the judgment delivered on the subject, has set aside the disallowances by order dated 9.8.2017. Against which the present appeal has been filed. 7. The Income tax department has raised the following grounds: “5. It is submitted that the Tribunal failed to appreciate the fact that in the case of on-site sub-contracting of work, complete work of software development, testing and installation is done by the associated enterprises and the assessee only acts as middleman/ intermediary between client and its associated enterprises. Deduction u/s.10B is site specific and the provisions of the Act are very clear in providing various specific requirements for eligibility if deduction u/s 10B of the Act. The Tribunal while relying on the decision in the case of M/s.Mphasis Software and Services India Pvt Ltd., has quoted various judgments of different Tribunals which are not applicable to the facts of this case. The Tribunal after going through the agreements as well as the work orders has found that the work of software development was undertaken by the assessee and risk and reward under the agreement belong to the assessee and not to the associated enterprises of the assessee, mere signing of an agreement does not change the actual nature of work performed. In the instant case the arrangement of work contract has been made by the assessee and its associated enterprises solely to avoid taxes. The Revenue was in appeal before the Tribunal on the only issue is whether the assessee is eligible for deduction u/s 10B with regard to income earned by the assessee from the on site development of software through its associated enterprises under sub contract. The Tribunal dismissed the Revenue’s appeal relying on the identical issue in the case of Mphasis Software Services India P.Ltd., which has not reached finality. 6. It is submitted that the Tribunal erred in setting aside the reduction of deduction under section 10B in respect of on-site software development work performed by the AEs of assessee outside India eventhough the ingredients of section 10B and its Explanation are not satisfied in the case of the assessee by following its earlier decision which has not reached finality. 7. It is submitted that the Tribunal erred in setting aside the recomputation of section 10B deduction by following the decision of this Hon’ble High Court in the case of CIT v/s Tata Elxsi and even when the recomputation done by the assessing authority is in accordance with the provisions of the Act. 8. It is submitted that the Tribunal erred in setting aside the disallowance of depreciation @ 60% on switches and routers amounting to Rs.98,11,575/- by following the decision of Delhi High Court. 9. It is submitted that the Tribunal erred in setting aside the disallowance of foreign exchange loss on forward contract of Rs.26,31,35,000/- by following the decision of Bombay High Court in the case of CIT v/s. D.Chethan and Co., in ITA No.278/14 dated 1.10.2016 by allowing the foreign exchange loss as business loss even when the assessee camouflaged the forward contract loss i.e., marked to market loss as well as hedge loss, in the guise of exchange rate fluctuation and the loss is required to be treated as speculative as per the provisions of section 43(5) of the Act.” 8. This Court has admitted the appeal on the following substantial questions of law : “1. Whether the Tribunal on the facts and circumstances of the case, the Tribunal is right in law in setting aside the disallowance of depreciation @ 60% on switches and routers amounting to Rs.98,11,575/- by following the decision of Delhi High Court? 2. Whether the Tribunal on the facts and circumstances of the case, the Tribunal is right in law in setting aside the disallowance of foreign exchange loss on forward contracts of Rs.26,31,35,000/- by following the decision of Bombay High Court in the case of CIT vs. D.Chetan and Co., in ITA No.278 of 2014 dated 01.10.2016, by allowing the foreign exchange loss as business loss even when the assessee camouflaged the forward contract loss i.e., marked to market loss as well as hedge loss, in the guise of exchange rate fluctuation and the loss is required to be treated as speculative as per the provisions of Section 43(5) of the Act?” 9. The learned counsel for the Income tax department has placed reliance upon a judgment delivered by the Bombay High Court in the case of COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX-16, MUMBAI vs. D.CHETAN & CO., reported in (2016) 75 taxmann.com 300 (Bombay) as well as upon a judgment delivered in the case of COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX, DELHI vs. WOODWARD GOVERNOR INDIA (P) LTD., reported in (2009) 179 Taxman 326(SC). 10. On the other hand, the learned counsel for respondent – assessee has placed reliance upon the following judgments: 1. CIT vs. MPHASIS SOFTWARE & SERVICES INDIA (P.) LTD., reported in (2015) 62 taxmann.com 165 (KARNATAKA), 2. CIT vs. MPHASIS LTD., reported in (2016) 74 taxmann.com 274 (KARNATAKA), 3. CIT vs. MPHASIS LTD., reported in (2020) 113 taxmann.com 74 (SC), 4. CIT vs. BSES YAMUNA POWERS LTD., reported in (2013) 40 taxmann.com 108 (Delhi), 5. CIT vs. D.CHETAN & CO. reported in (2016) 75 taxmann.com 300 (Bombay) and 6. CIT vs. WOODWARD GOVERNOR INDIA (P.) LTD., reported in (2009) 179 Taxman 326(SC). 11. Heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record. In respect of the first substantial question of law, the judgment delivered by the Delhi High Court in the case of CIT vs. BSES YAMUNA POWERS LTD., reported in (2013) 40 taxmann.com 108 (Delhi) has concluded the controversy. The Delhi High Court in paragraphs 5 and 6 of the aforesaid judgment has held as under:- “5. However, upon a perusal of the file, we find that the higher rate of depreciation was allowed both by the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) (“CIT(A)”) and the Tribunal. In fact, the Tribunal in its impugned order has observed as under :- “The issue involved in this appeal is covered by the decision of Coordinate Bench of the Tribunal as discussed below:- In the case of ITO vs. Samiran Majumdar (2006) 98 ITD 119 (Kol.), Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, Kolkata Bench “B‟, has taken a view that the printer and scanner are integral part of the computer system and are to be treated as computer for the purpose of allowing higher rate of depreciation, i.e., 60%. 3.2 The Income tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi “F” Bench in the case of Expeditors International (India) (P) Ltd. Vs. CIT reported in (2008) 118 TTJ 652 (Delhi) has held that peripherals such as printer, scanners, NT Server, etc. form integral part of the computer and the same, therefore, are eligible for depreciation at the rate of 60% as applicable to a computer. 4. Respectfully following the aforesaid decisions of the Coordinate Bench, we uphold the order of the learned Commissioner of Income tax (Appeals) in allowing the depreciation at 60% on computer peripherals and accessories, and, thus, the ground raised by the revenue is rejected. 5. In the result, the appeal filed by the revenue is dismissed.” 6. We are in agreement with the view of the Tribunal that computer accessories and peripherals such as, printers, scanners and server etc. form an integral part of the computer system. In fact, the computer accessories and peripherals cannot be used without the computer. Consequently, as they are the part of the computer system, they are entitled to depreciation at the higher rate of 60%.” 12. The Delhi High Court has held that the computer accessories and peripherals such as printers, scanners and server etc., form an integral part of the computer system. 13. In light of aforesaid judgment, it can be safely held that the switches and routers as they cannot be used without computer, they form part of peripherals of the computer and entitled to depreciation at 60%. The revenue has not been able to controvert the said finding of the Tribunal and therefore, in light of the judgment delivered by the Delhi High Court, the first substantial question of law is answered in favour of the assessee and against the revenue. 14. In respect of the second substantial question of law which is arising on account of the Tribunal’s order in setting aside the disallowance of foreign exchange loss on forward contracts, the issue stands covered by the judgment delivered by the Bombay High Court in the case of CIT vs. D.CHETAN & CO. reported in (2016) 75 taxmann.com 300 (Bombay). The Bombay High Court has held that the loss arising out of the foreign exchange fluctuation on forward contract should be allowed as deduction. Paragraphs 6 and 7 of the judgment delivered by the Bombay High Court read as under: “6. Mr. Malhotra, learned Counsel appearing for the Revenue submits that this appeal had to be admitted as the impugned order has ignored its order in the case of S. Vinodkumar Diamonds Pvt. Ltd. v. Addl. CIT, (2013) 59 SOT 124/35 taxmann.com 337 (Mum.-Trib.) rendered on 3 May 2013 which on similar facts is in favour of the Revenue. He further submits that the impugned order of the Tribunal is suspect because it accepts the Respondent assessee’s claim without calling upon it to prove that the same was not speculative. Lastly, he sought to place reliance upon Accounting Standard-11 to claim that such a loss is not allowable thereunder. 7. The impugned order of the Tribunal has, while upholding the finding of the CIT (Appeals), independently come to the conclusion that the transaction entered into by the Respondent assessee is not in the nature of speculative activities. Further the hedging transactions were entered into so as to cover variation in foreign exchange rate which would impact its business of import and export of diamonds. These concurrent finding of facts are not shown to be perverse in any manner. In fact, the Assessing Officer also in the Assessment Order does not find that the transaction entered into by the Respondent assessee was speculative in nature. It further holds that at no point of time did Revenue challenge the assertion of the Respondent assessee that the activity of entering into forward contract was in the regular course of its business only to safeguard against the loss on account of foreign exchange variation. Even before the Tribunal, we find that there was no submission recorded on behalf of the Revenue that the Respondent assessee should be called upon to explain the nature of its transactions. Thus, the submission now being made is without any foundation as the stand of the assessee on facts was never disputed. So far as the reliance on Accounting Standard-11 is concerned, it would not by itself determine whether the activity was a part of the Respondent-assessee’s regular business transaction or it was a speculative transaction. On present facts, it was never the Revenue’s contention that the transaction was speculative but only disallowed on the ground that it was notional. Lastly, the reliance placed on the decision in S. Vinodkumar Diamonds Pvt.Ltd., (supra) in the Revenue’s favour would not by itself govern the issues arising herein. This is so as every decision is rendered in the context of the facts which arise before the authority for adjudication. Mere conclusion in favour of the Revenue in another case by itself would not entitle a party to have an identical relief in this case. In fact, if the Revenue was of the view that the facts in S. Vinodkumar (supra) are identical/similar to the present facts, then reliance would have been placed by the Revenue upon it at the hearing before the Tribunal. The impugned order does not indicate any such reliance. It appears that in S. Vinodkumar Diamonds Pvt.Ltd., (supra), the Tribunal held the forward contract on facts before it to be speculative in nature in view of Section 43(5) of the Act. However, it appears that the decision of this court in CIT v. Badridas Gauridu (P) Ltd., 2004 (134) Taxman Pg. 376 (Mum) was not brought to the notice of the Tribunal when it rendered its decision in S. Vinodkumar Diamonds Pvt.Ltd., (supra). In the above case, this court has held that forward contract in foreign exchange when incidental to carrying on business of cotton exporter and done to cover up losses on account of differences in foreign exchange valuations, would not be speculative activity but a business activity.” In light of aforesaid judgment, this Court is of the opinion that the Tribunal was justified in setting aside the disallowance of foreign exchange loss on forward contract. 15. Learned counsel for the revenue has argued before this Court that such loss is a notional and contingent and has to be treated as speculative loss in terms of Section 43(5) of the Income tax Act. He has also argued before this Court that the Tribunal without examining the finding rendered by the assessing officer, has allowed the issue in favour of the assesseee by merely relying upon the judgment delivered in the case of M/s Kotak Mahendra Bank Ltd. 16. This Court has carefully gone through the entire record and the case of the assessee is that the loss is on account of the restatement of debtors and creditors, book liability etc., which was incurred on account of the forward contracts which includes both realized and unrealized losses. The details of gain and loss on account of the fluctuations of foreign exchange were filed before the assessing officer. However, the assessing officer merely relying upon Instruction No.3/2010 issued by the Central Board of Direct Taxes concluded that it is a notional loss and has to be treated as a speculative loss in terms of Section 43(5) of the Act. 17. It is pertinent to note that the assessing officer did not dispute the fact that the loss incurred by the respondent – assessee is in the ordinary course of its business and therefore, would fall within the exceptions provided in the proviso to Section 43(5) of the Act. Therefore, the judgment delivered in the case of D.Chethan and Co., (supra) squarely covers the present case. 18. The Bombay High Court in the aforesaid case has held that the assessing officer has not given a finding that the transaction entered into by the assesseee was a speculative in nature and the revenue at no point challenged the assertion of the assessee that the activity of entering into the forward contract was in the regular course of its business. Therefore, in the present case when the assessing officer has neither disputed the fact that the loss was in the regular course of business nor rendered any finding that the transaction was speculative in nature except making a bald statement, the Tribunal was justified in relying upon its earlier judgment in the case of Kotak Mahendra Bank Limited which was based upon a judgment delivered by the Bombay High Court in the case of D.Chetan and Co., (supra). 19. It is pertinent to note that the Hon’ble Supreme court in the case of CIT vs. WOODWARD GOVERNOR INDIA (P.) LTD., reported in (2009) 179 Taxman 326(SC) in paragraphs 13 to 15 has held as under: “13. As stated above, one of the main arguments advanced by the learned Additional Solicitor General on behalf of the Department before us was that the word “expenditure” in Section 37(1) connotes “what is paid out” and that which has gone irretrievably. In this connection, heavy reliance was placed on the judgment of this Court in the case of Indian Molasses Company (supra). Relying on the said judgment, it was sought to be argued that the increase in liability at any point of time prior to the date of payment cannot be said to have gone irretrievably as it can always come back. According to the learned counsel, in the case of increase in liability due to foreign exchange fluctuations, if there is a revaluation of the rupee vis-a-vis foreign exchange at or prior to the point of payment, then there would be no question of money having gone irretrievably and consequently, the requirement of “expenditure” is not met. Consequently, the additional liability arising on account of fluctuation in the rate of foreign exchange was merely a contingent/notional liability which does not crystallize till payment. In that case, the Supreme Court was considering the meaning of the expression “expenditure incurred” while dealing with the question as to whether there was a distinction between the actual liability in presenti and a liability de futuro. The word “expenditure” is not defined in the 1961 Act. The word “expenditure” is, therefore, required to be understood in the context in which it is used. Section 37 enjoins that any expenditure not being expenditure of the nature described in Sections 30 to 36 laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purposes of the business should be allowed in computing the income chargeable under the head “profits and gains of business”. In Sections 30 to 36, the expressions “expenses incurred” as well as “allowances and depreciation” has also been used. For example, depreciation and allowances are dealt with in Section 32. Therefore, Parliament has used the expression “any expenditure” in Section 37 to cover both. Therefore, the expression “expenditure” as used in Section 37 may, in the circumstances of a particular case, cover an amount which is really a “loss” even though the said amount has not gone out from the pocket of the assessee. 14. In the case of M.P. Financial Corporation v. CIT reported in (1987) 165 ITR 765 the Madhya Pradesh High Court has held that the expression “expenditure” as used in Section 37 may, in the circumstances of a particular case, cover an amount which is a “loss” even though the said amount has not gone out from the pocket of the assessee. This view of the Madhya Pradesh High Court has been approved by this Court in the case of Madras Industrial Investment Corporation Ltd. v. CIT reported in (1977) 225 ITR 802. According to the Law and Practice of Income Tax by Kanga and Palkhivala, Section 37(1) is a residuary section extending the allowance to items of business expenditure not covered by Sections 30 to 36. This Section, according to the learned Author, covers cases of business expenditure only, and not of business losses which are, however, deductible on ordinary principles of commercial accounting. (see page 617 of the eighth edition). It is this principle which attracts the provisions of Section 145. That section recognizes the rights of a trader to adopt either the cash system or the mercantile system of accounting. The quantum of allowances permitted to be deducted under diverse heads under Sections 30 to 43C from the income, profits and gains of a business would differ according to the system adopted. This is made clear by defining the word “paid” in Section 43(2), which is used in several Sections 30 to 43C, as meaning actually paid or incurred according to the method of accounting upon the basis on which profits or gains are computed under Section 28/29. That is why in deciding the question as to whether the word “expenditure” in Section 37(1) includes the word “loss” one has to read Section 37(1) with Section 28, Section 29 and Section 145(1). One more principle needs to be kept in mind. Accounts regularly maintained in the course of business are to be taken as correct unless there are strong and sufficient reasons to indicate that they are unreliable. One more aspect needs to be highlighted. Under Section 28(i), one needs to decide the profits and gains of any business which is carried on by the assessee during the previous year. Therefore, one has to take into account stock-in-trade for determination of profits. The 1961 Act makes no provision with regard to valuation of stock. But the ordinary principle of commercial accounting requires that in the P&L account the value of the stock-in- trade at the beginning and at the end of the year should be entered at cost or market price, whichever is the lower. This is how business profits arising during the year needs to be computed. This is one more reason for reading Section 37(1) with Section 145. For valuing the closing stock at the end of a particular year, the value prevailing on the last date is relevant. This is because profits/loss is embedded in the closing stock. While anticipated loss is taken into account, anticipated profit in the shape of appreciated value of the closing stock is not brought into account, as no prudent trader would care to show increase profits before actual realization. This is the theory underlying the Rule that closing stock is to be valued at cost or market price, whichever is the lower. As profits for income-tax purposes are to be computed in accordance with ordinary principles of commercial accounting, unless, such principles stand superseded or modified by legislative enactments, unrealized profits in the shape of appreciated value of goods remaining unsold at the end of the accounting year and carried over to the following years account in a continuing business are not brought to the charge as a matter of practice, though, as stated above, loss due to fall in the price below cost is allowed even though such loss has not been realized actually. At this stage, we need to emphasise once again that the above system of commercial accounting can be superseded or modified by legislative enactment. This is where Section 145(2) comes into play. Under that section, the Central Government is empowered to notify from time to time the Accounting Standards to be followed by any class of assessees or in respect of any class of income. Accordingly, under Section 209 of the Companies Act, mercantile system of accounting is made mandatory for companies. In other words, accounting standard which is continuously adopted by an assessee can be superseded or modified by Legislative intervention. However, but for such intervention or in cases falling under Section 145(3), the method of accounting undertaken by the assessee continuously is supreme. In the present batch of cases, there is no finding given by the AO on the correctness or completeness of the accounts of the assessee. Equally, there is no finding given by the AO stating that the assessee has not complied with the accounting standards. 15. For the reasons given hereinabove, we hold that, in the present case, the “loss” suffered by the assessee on account of the exchange difference as on the date of the balance sheet is an item of expenditure under Section 37(1) of the 1961 Act.” The Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that the loss on account foreign exchange fluctuation is allowable as a deduction under Section 37(1) of the Act. 20. Keeping in view aforesaid, the second substantial question of law is answered again in favour of the assessee and against the revenue. The appeal is dismissed accordingly. No orders as to costs. Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Filed under high court judgmentsSection 10Bsection 32Section 37section 37(1) Author Info Name: CA Sandeep Kanoi Qualification: CA in Job / Business Company: Taxguru Consultancy Location: Mumbai, Maharashtra Articles Published: 21,489 View full profile → More from CA Sandeep Kanoi GST Registration Reforms: Rule 14A, REG-01, Cancellation and ECO Sellers October 9, 2026 ITAT Delhi Deletes ₹37.50 Lakh Cash Deposit Addition Supported by Bank Withdrawals October 9, 2026 Personal Hearing Mandatory Before Adverse GST Assessment Order: Allahabad High Court October 9, 2026 Join TaxGuru's Network for the latest updates on Income Tax, GST, Company Law, Corporate Laws and other related subjects. Join Our WhatsApp Group Join Our Telegram Group Review us on Google Related Articles in Income Tax ITAT Quashes Section 263 Revision After AO Examined Claims and Adopted a Permissible View October 9, 2026 CBDT Notifies Revised Form 161 for Penalty Waiver Under Income-tax Act, 2025 October 9, 2026 ITAT Chandigarh Quashes Reassessment and Deletes ₹12.13 Crore Section 69C Addition October 9, 2026 ITAT Mumbai Rejects 667-Day Appeal Delay Caused by Spam Folder Email October 9, 2026 ITAT Mumbai Remands ₹1.48 Crore Unexplained Bank Credits to CIT(A) October 9, 2026 Section 153C Notice Quashed as AY 2016-17 Fell Outside Six-Year Limitation: Delhi HC October 9, 2026