Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Summary: The Government of India issued Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on 9 October 2026 explaining the GST Council’s recommendations for rationalisation and decriminalisation of arrest and prosecution provisions under GST. The principal recommendation is to remove the statutory arrest provisions and increase the monetary threshold for launching prosecution from ₹1 crore to ₹5 crore. Under the proposed framework, persons would no longer be arrested for offences under GST law, although tax authorities could initiate prosecution before the competent court where the amount involved exceeds ₹5 crore. These recommendations represent proposed legislative changes and should not be treated as already effective merely on the basis of the FAQs. The proposed amendments also rationalise imprisonment and penalties under Section 132 of the CGST Act. For offences involving amounts exceeding ₹10 crore, the maximum punishment would be imprisonment up to five years, a fine, or both. For amounts exceeding ₹5 crore but not exceeding ₹10 crore, imprisonment would be limited to two years, a fine, or both. The proposed substitution of mandatory imprisonment and fine with imprisonment or fine or both would provide courts greater sentencing discretion. The existing requirement of a minimum imprisonment of six months under Section 132(3) is also proposed to be removed. Further, the Council recommended narrowing the scope of certain prosecutable offences under Section 132(1). Clause (i), concerning specified contraventions involving the supply of services, is proposed to be omitted. Clause (e) would be confined to fraudulent refunds by removing the expression “evades tax”, while clause (h) would be narrowed by deleting the expression “or in any other manner deals with”. Together, these measures are intended to reduce criminal exposure for taxpayers, focus prosecution on higher-value offences and provide greater proportionality in sentencing. Economy Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on rationalisation and decriminalisation of arrest and prosecution provisions in GST Posted On: 09 OCT 2026 4:51PM S. No. Question Answer 13. What changes have been recommended by the GST Council in respect of arrest and prosecution provision under GST? The GST Council has recommended: removal of the arrest provisions under GST; increase in the threshold for prosecution from Rs. 1 crore to Rs. 5 crore; omission or narrowing of certain offences under section 132(1) of the CGST Act, and redrafting of clause (c) thereof; rationalisation of the maximum term of imprisonment from three or two years in case of tax evasion of more between Rs 5 to Rs 10 Crore; and discretion to the Court to impose only a fine, and removal of the minimum imprisonment of six months. 14. Can someone be arrested under GST after the proposed amendment? No. The arrest provisions under GST are now proposed to be removed, and no person shall be arrested for an offence under the GST law.However, prosecution may still be launched before the competent Court, on a complaint filed by the tax authorities, where the amount involved exceeds Rs. 5 crore. 15. In which cases can someone be prosecuted under GST? Prosecution may be launched for offences under section 132(1) where the evaded tax amount exceeds Rs. 5 crore, as against the present threshold of Rs. 1 crore. 17. What will be the punishment on conviction after the amendment? The maximum term of imprisonment is being rationalised as under: where the amount involved exceeds Rs. 10 crore: imprisonment up to five years, or fine, or both; where the amount involved exceeds Rs. 5 crore but does not exceed Rs. 10 crore: imprisonment up to two years, or fine, or both. 18. Someone who is convicted, will imprisonment be compulsory? No. The punishment is proposed to be changed from “imprisonment and fine” to “imprisonment or fine or both”, so that the Court may have discretion of awarding punishment.Further, the requirement of a minimum imprisonment of six months under section 132(3) is being removed, so as to confer discretion on the Court. 19 Which offences are being omitted or narrowed for the purpose of prosecution? Clause (i) of section 132(1), relating to supply of services in contravention of the Act, is being omitted, as the offence is difficult to quantify and liable to subjective interpretation. Clause (e) of section 132(1): the expression “evades tax” is being omitted, so that the clause is confined to fraudulently obtaining refund. Clause (h) of section 132(1): the expression “or in any other manner deals with” is being omitted, leaving only the specific acts listed in the clause. Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Filed under Goods And Services TaxGSTGST CouncilGST FAQsGST Notifications Join TaxGuru's Network for the latest updates on Income Tax, GST, Company Law, Corporate Laws and other related subjects. Join Our WhatsApp Group Join Our Telegram Group Review us on Google Related Articles in Goods and Services Tax GST ITC Allowed on Fresh IPO Expenses Used for Business: Telangana AAR October 10, 2026 Telangana GST AAAR Rejects Pure Services GST Exemption for Private Contractor Subcontract October 10, 2026 57th GST Council Meeting: Key Recommendations and Taxpayer Impact October 10, 2026 Supplier’s Subsequent GST Registration Cancellation Alone Does Not Prove Fraudulent ITC: Karnataka HC October 10, 2026 GSTAT Quashes GST Demand Against Deceased Proprietor Under Section 93: GSTAT October 10, 2026 Supreme Court Dismisses ₹25.47 Lakh Tax Appeals Under CBIC Monetary Limits October 10, 2026