Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Summary: The Government has issued Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on amendment in GST registration, published on 9 October 2026 at 4:59 PM, explaining changes in the treatment and processing of core and non-core amendments. Amendments relating to the legal name of a business, constitution of the business and Additional Place of Business (APoB), which previously required approval from the proper officer, will now be treated as non-core amendments and processed automatically by the GST system. Amendments to the Principal Place of Business (PPoB) for taxpayers registered under Rule 14A of the CGST Rules, 2017, will also be processed automatically without officer approval. However, amendments to the PPoB for registrations obtained under provisions other than Rule 14A will continue to require officer approval. Taxpayers seeking to amend their legal name must submit FORM GST REG-14 on the common portal, with the amendment taking effect through the system following successful PAN validation. For addition of an APoB or amendment of PPoB under Rule 14A, taxpayers must submit FORM GST REG-14 with the prescribed supporting documents. For normal taxpayers registered under Rule 9, PPoB amendments remain subject to scrutiny by the proper officer. Where no discrepancy exists, approval is to be granted within 15 days of application. If discrepancies arise, a show-cause notice must be issued within 15 days, the taxpayer must reply within seven working days, and the officer must act within seven working days of receiving the reply. Multiple APoB amendments may be filed without waiting for approval of an earlier application because such amendments are processed automatically. Economy Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on amendment in GST registration Posted On: 09 OCT 2026 4:59PM S.No. Question Answer 1. What changes have been introduced in respect of amendment of GST registration? The amendments relating to the legal name of the business, constitution of the business and Additional Place of business, hitherto were considered core amendments and therefore required approval from the officer. However, now such amendments would be considered non-core amendments and such amendments would be automatically processed by the system without need of approval from the officer. Further, the amendment of Principal Place of Business (PPoB) in respect of registration obtained under rule 14A of CGST Rules, 2017, will also be considered non-core amendment now and will be processed through this automatic route by the system, without requiring approval of the officer. However, for GST registrations other than those obtained under Rule 14A of CGST Rules, 2017, any amendment in PPoB would continue to be considered core amendment and would require approval of the officer. 2. How can I change the legal name of my business? You need to submit an application in FORM GST REG-14 on the common portal. After successful submission of application on the common portal and on successful validation of PAN details furnished by you, the legal name will be amended by the system. 3. How can I add an Additional Place of Business (APoB) to my GST registration? You need to submit an application on the common portal in FORM GST REG-14, along with the required documents as proof of the place of business, as specified in the list attached to FORM GST REG-01. The application will be processed automatically by the system and the APoB details will be added in the registration of the applicant. 4. I have taken registration under simplified registration scheme, under rule 14A of CGST Rules, 2017. What is the process for changing my Principal Place of Business (PPoB)? You need to submit an application on the common portal in FORM GST REG-14, along with the required documents as proof of the place of business, as specified in the list attached to FORM GST REG-01. The application will be processed automatically by the system and the PPoB details will be amended in the registration of the applicant. 5. I am a normal taxpayer registered under rule 9 of CGST Rules, 2017. How can I change my PPoB? You need to submit an application on the common portal in FORM GST REG-14 along with the required documents as proof of the Principal Place of Business, as specified in the list attached to FORM GST REG-01. On successful submission of application, the application will be processed by the proper for amendment of PPoB in the following manner: If there is no discrepancy, the application will be approved by the Proper officer within 15 days from the date of application. If there is a discrepancy in the PPoB application, the proper officer shall issue a show-cause notice within 15 days from the date of application. The applicant must reply within 7 working days from the date of issue of the notice. iii. After receiving the reply, the officer shall to take action within 7 working days. 6. I wish to add multiple additional places of business in my registration details. Do I need to wait for approval of my earlier application before filing a new amendment application? Since amendment to additional place of business will be accepted automatically by the system, there would not be any waiting required. Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Filed under Goods And Services TaxGSTGST CouncilGST FAQsGST NotificationsGST Registration Join TaxGuru's Network for the latest updates on Income Tax, GST, Company Law, Corporate Laws and other related subjects. Join Our WhatsApp Group Join Our Telegram Group Review us on Google Related Articles in Goods and Services Tax GST ITC Allowed on Fresh IPO Expenses Used for Business: Telangana AAR October 10, 2026 Telangana GST AAAR Rejects Pure Services GST Exemption for Private Contractor Subcontract October 10, 2026 57th GST Council Meeting: Key Recommendations and Taxpayer Impact October 10, 2026 Supplier’s Subsequent GST Registration Cancellation Alone Does Not Prove Fraudulent ITC: Karnataka HC October 10, 2026 GSTAT Quashes GST Demand Against Deceased Proprietor Under Section 93: GSTAT October 10, 2026 Supreme Court Dismisses ₹25.47 Lakh Tax Appeals Under CBIC Monetary Limits October 10, 2026