Summary: The 57th GST Council Meeting held on 8 October 2026 recommended significant reforms to simplify GST compliance, strengthen taxpayer safeguards and improve ease of doing business. Major proposals include withdrawal of arrest powers under Section 69, an increase in the prosecution threshold to ₹5 crore, exemption from show cause notices for tax demands below ₹10,000, reduced penalties and simplified appeal pre-deposit requirements. The Council also recommended expanding input tax credit eligibility for free samples, expired goods, insurance, outdoor catering and other business expenses. Refund reforms include automated processing, faster acknowledgements and broader eligibility for accumulated ITC on input services and capital goods. Other measures cover simplified e-commerce registration, automatic registration amendments and cancellation, return reconciliation, the proposed Annual Return Quarterly Payment scheme, export facilitation, restrictions on interception of goods and expanded e-invoicing requirements. These recommendations require implementation through applicable legislative amendments, rules, notifications and circulars before becoming legally operative. 57th GST Council Meeting: Major Reforms Towards a Simpler, Trust-Based GST Regime The recommendations of the 57th GST Council Meeting represent one of the most significant taxpayer-friendly reform packages under GST. The Council has focused on reducing litigation, improving ease of doing business, widening Input Tax Credit (ITC) availability, accelerating refunds, and simplifying compliance procedures. These recommendations will be implemented through the necessary amendments, notifications, and circulars and do not have legal effect until formally notified. Table of Contents▸ Key Highlights of the 57th GST Council Meeting 1. No GST Notices for Small Demands 2. ITC Relief on Free Samples and Destroyed Goods 3. Simplified GST Registration for Sellers on E-Commerce Platforms 4. Expansion of Refund Benefits 5. Facility to Amend GST Liability and ITC 6. Removal of Arrest Provisions 7. Export of Services Made Easier 8. Annual Return Quarterly Payment (ARQP) Scheme Other Notable Reforms Blocked ITC Rationalization Faster and Automated GST Refunds Automatic Registration Amendments Simplified Registration Cancellation Reduced Penalties Cap on Appeal Pre-deposit E-Way Bill and Goods-in-Transit Relief Opportunity Before ITC Blocking Late Fee Relief for Small Taxpayers E-Invoicing Expansion IPR Transactions Conclusion Show all 22 sections Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Key Highlights of the 57th GST Council Meeting 1. No GST Notices for Small Demands To reduce litigation and compliance burden, the Council has recommended a minimum threshold of ₹10,000 (CGST + SGST + IGST + Cess combined) for issuance of Show Cause Notices (SCNs). Accordingly, no notice will be issued where the tax amount involved is below ₹10,000. Further, pending notices and appeals involving amounts below ₹10,000 will also be disposed of as if the threshold had been in force when such notices were issued. 2. ITC Relief on Free Samples and Destroyed Goods In a significant relief to businesses, the Council has recommended removal of restrictions on availment of ITC in respect of: Free samples Goods destroyed or written off due to expiry of shelf life as required by law This measure is expected to benefit industries such as pharmaceuticals, FMCG, retail and other sectors dealing with promotional distributions and perishable inventories. 3. Simplified GST Registration for Sellers on E-Commerce Platforms Small suppliers selling goods through Electronic Commerce Operators (ECOs) can obtain GST registration in States where they have no physical presence by declaring the ECO’s warehouse as their Principal Place of Business (PPOB). The facility is available subject to prescribed conditions, including cases where the supplier intends to pass on ITC not exceeding ₹2.5 lakh per month (excluding stock transfers between distinct persons). Registration will be granted automatically through the system. 4. Expansion of Refund Benefits The Council has recommended broadening refund eligibility by allowing: Refund of accumulated ITC on capital goods for zero-rated supplies. Refund of accumulated ITC on input services and capital goods under the inverted duty structure. Key implementation timelines: Refund of ITC on input services under inverted duty structure will be available for ITC availed on or after 1 November 2026. Refund of ITC on capital goods will be available for ITC availed on or after 1 April 2027, spread over a period of 60 months. These measures are expected to improve working capital and reduce accumulation of unutilized credits. 5. Facility to Amend GST Liability and ITC To address return mismatches and reduce system-generated notices, taxpayers will be provided a structured mechanism for: Correction and rectification of GST liabilities. Correction and rectification of ITC availed. Better alignment between GSTR-1, GSTR-3B and GSTR-2B. Improved reporting of reverse charge liabilities and ITC reversals. The proposed framework is intended to be implemented from GST returns for April 2027, after stakeholder consultation. 6. Removal of Arrest Provisions In a landmark recommendation, the Council has proposed: Complete withdrawal of arrest powers under GST through omission of Section 69 of the CGST Act. Increase in prosecution threshold from ₹1 crore to ₹5 crore. This marks a major shift towards a trust-based tax administration system while retaining safeguards against serious fraud and evasion. 7. Export of Services Made Easier The Council has recommended removal of the condition that the supplier and recipient should not be establishments of the same person for a transaction to qualify as an export of services. This will facilitate exports by Indian businesses supplying services to or through foreign branches, overseas offices and group entities. 8. Annual Return Quarterly Payment (ARQP) Scheme The Council has given in-principle approval to a concept note for an optional Annual Return Quarterly Payment (ARQP) scheme. The proposed scheme would apply to taxpayers having: Turnover up to ₹5 crore in the preceding financial year, and Exclusively B2C supplies. The objective is to significantly reduce compliance burden for small businesses. Other Notable Reforms Blocked ITC Rationalization ITC is proposed to be allowed on: Outdoor catering Health insurance Life insurance Telecommunication towers Pipelines laid outside factory premises Free samples Goods destroyed or written off due to expiry of shelf life as required by law This will reduce cascading taxes and improve credit flow across industries. Faster and Automated GST Refunds The Council has recommended: Fully automated refund of excess electronic cash ledger balances. Reduction of acknowledgement timeline from 15 days to 10 days. Deemed acknowledgement where no action is taken within 10 days. Automatic provisional sanction of up to 90% of eligible refund claims based on system-driven risk evaluation. These changes are expected to significantly improve business liquidity. Automatic Registration Amendments Most amendments in GST registration particulars will be auto-approved without officer intervention. Even amendments relating to Principal Place of Business may be automatically approved for taxpayers registered through the automatic registration route. Simplified Registration Cancellation The Council has proposed: Automatic cancellation of registrations upon fulfilment of prescribed conditions. System-based cancellation and revocation mechanisms. Significant reduction in officer interface. These measures are aimed at making registration administration more transparent and efficient. Reduced Penalties The Council has recommended: Reduction of maximum general penalty from ₹25,000 to ₹10,000. Reduced penalty of 5% in specified non-fraud cases where tax and interest are paid within prescribed timelines. Removal of the mandatory minimum penalty of ₹10,000 in certain non-fraud cases. Cap on Appeal Pre-deposit For cases involving only penalties and no tax demand, the Council has proposed an upper pre-deposit limit of: ₹20 crore under CGST, and ₹20 crore under SGST/UTGST, resulting in an overall cap of ₹40 crore. E-Way Bill and Goods-in-Transit Relief The Council has recommended that: Interception of goods in transit should be based on specific intelligence and prior authorization by an officer not below the rank of Joint Commissioner. Transit-state interceptions should generally not occur. Confiscation provisions should not apply to goods and conveyances in transit. Opportunity Before ITC Blocking Before blocking the electronic credit ledger under Rule 86A, taxpayers will be entitled to: File objections, and Seek a personal hearing before a final decision is taken. Late Fee Relief for Small Taxpayers Waiver of late fees has been recommended where: Turnover does not exceed ₹5 crore in the preceding year; and The delayed return is filed by the end of the month in which it was due. E-Invoicing Expansion The Council has recommended extending e-invoicing requirements to: Domestic reverse charge transactions from unregistered suppliers, and Import of services, for taxpayers having aggregate turnover of ₹5 crore and above. IPR Transactions Transfer of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR), whether temporary or permanent, is proposed to be treated uniformly as a supply of services, providing certainty for domestic and cross-border transactions. Conclusion The recommendations of the 57th GST Council Meeting signal a decisive move towards a technology-enabled, trust-based and business-friendly GST ecosystem. Measures such as the ₹10,000 notice threshold, removal of arrest provisions, wider ITC eligibility, expansion of refund benefits, simplified ECO registrations, automated refunds, reduction in penalties, and correction mechanisms for liabilities and ITC are expected to significantly reduce litigation, improve cash flows and ease compliance across industries. The proposed ARQP framework and export-related relaxations further reinforce the Government’s commitment to enhancing India’s ease of doing business. ****** Author’s Note: This article is intended solely for educational and informational purposes. The recommendations discussed above are based on the press release issued after the 57th GST Council Meeting and will become effective only upon issuance of the relevant notifications, circulars, and legislative amendments. The author shall not be responsible for any loss or consequence arising from reliance on this article without reference to the applicable law and notifications. Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Filed under Goods And Services TaxGSTGST CouncilGST Refundinput tax credit Author Info Name: CA. Brijesh Bindal Qualification: CA-Final_G1_Cleared Company: Cosage Advisors Location: Delhi, Delhi Articles Published: 3 View full profile → More from CA. Brijesh Bindal Introducing Electronic Credit Reversal and Reclaimed statement September 2, 2023 Form 26A (non-deduction or short deduction) – Legal provisions, benefits & procedures August 10, 2023 Join TaxGuru's Network for the latest updates on Income Tax, GST, Company Law, Corporate Laws and other related subjects. Join Our WhatsApp Group Join Our Telegram Group Review us on Google Related Articles in Goods and Services Tax GST Service Rate and Exemption Reforms: EVs, Helicopters, R&D and Highways October 9, 2026 GST Arrest, Prosecution and E-Way Bill Reforms: What the 57th Council Recommended October 9, 2026 From Arrest to Auto-Refund: Key GST Changes Proposed in 57th GST Council Meeting October 9, 2026 E-Invoice Lapse Without Proven Tax Evasion: GSTAT Deletes ₹63.72 Lakh Penalty October 9, 2026 Section 74 SCN Must Specify Fraud Allegations Supported by Facts: Himachal Pradesh HC October 9, 2026 GST Cannot Be Deducted From Land Acquisition Compensation by State: Karnataka HC October 9, 2026