Summary: Goods Transport Agency (GTA) services are subject to specific GST provisions governing the Reverse Charge Mechanism (RCM), tax rates and input tax credit. A transporter generally qualifies as a GTA when it provides transportation services by road and issues a consignment note. Under Section 9(3) of the CGST Act, 2017, read with Notification No. 13/2017-Central Tax (Rate), specified recipients may be required to pay GST under RCM when the GTA has not opted for forward charge. The applicable tax rate and liability depend on the relevant notifications and the option exercised by the GTA. Businesses should examine freight invoices, consignment notes and transporter details before determining GST liability. Tax payable under RCM must be discharged through the electronic cash ledger, while eligible recipients may claim input tax credit under Section 16, subject to statutory conditions. Proper documentation, correct classification and timely tax payment help reduce compliance risks, interest and penalties. Table of Contents▸ GST on Goods Transport Agency (GTA) Services and Reverse Charge Mechanism Meaning of Goods Transport Agency under GST Applicability of Reverse Charge Mechanism on GTA Services Persons Liable to Pay GST under RCM on GTA Services GST Rate on GTA Services under RCM and Forward Charge Practical Compliance Issues in Freight Expenses Payment of GST under RCM and Input Tax Credit Eligibility Conclusion Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); GST on Goods Transport Agency (GTA) Services and Reverse Charge Mechanism Goods Transport Agency (GTA) services are an important part of business activities. Almost every business has to incur transportation expenses for the purchase or sale of goods. Under GST, the liability to pay tax on GTA services depends upon the nature of the service and the conditions prescribed under the GST law. Meaning of Goods Transport Agency under GST A Goods Transport Agency is a person who provides services in relation to the transportation of goods by road and issues a consignment note. If a transporter does not issue a consignment note, the service may not fall within the definition of GTA under GST. Applicability of Reverse Charge Mechanism on GTA Services Under Section 9(3) of the CGST Act, 2017, read with Notification No. 13/2017-Central Tax (Rate), GST is payable under the Reverse Charge Mechanism (RCM) on specified GTA services, subject to the applicable conditions. Persons Liable to Pay GST under RCM on GTA Services Under RCM, the responsibility to pay GST shifts from the supplier to the recipient of the service. In the case of GTA, this liability may arise where the GTA has not opted to pay GST under the Forward Charge Mechanism and the recipient belongs to the specified categories under the law. These categories include registered persons, body corporates, partnership firms, factories and certain other specified entities. GST Rate on GTA Services under RCM and Forward Charge The rate of GST and the applicability of RCM should be checked according to the relevant notification and the option exercised by the GTA. Generally, the applicable rate under RCM is 5%, subject to the prescribed conditions. Where the GTA has opted for the Forward Charge Mechanism, the tax treatment may be different. Practical Compliance Issues in Freight Expenses In practical situations, many businesses record freight expenses in their books of accounts without checking whether GST under RCM is payable. This may create problems at the time of departmental scrutiny or audit. Therefore, every taxpayer should properly examine freight bills, consignment notes and the GST status of the transporter. Payment of GST under RCM and Input Tax Credit Eligibility GST payable under RCM must be discharged through the electronic cash ledger. However, the recipient may claim input tax credit of the tax paid under RCM, subject to the conditions prescribed under Section 16 of the CGST Act, 2017. Conclusion In conclusion, RCM on GTA services is an important compliance issue under GST. Taxpayers should carefully examine the nature of transportation services and the applicable legal provisions before determining their tax liability. Proper documentation and timely payment of tax can help avoid unnecessary interest, penalties and disputes with the department. Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Filed under Goods And Services TaxGSTGST on GTAReverse Charge Mechanism Author Info Name: Rakesh Bansal Adv Qualification: LL.B / Advocate Company: Rakesh Bansal & CO. (Advocate) Location: DELHI, Delhi Articles Published: 6 View full profile → More from Rakesh Bansal Adv Scope of Professional Practice Under GST Law in India July 12, 2026 Request for Extension of Income Tax Return Verification date July 24, 2023 Request for Lower GST Interest Rate – Business Concerns July 23, 2023 Join TaxGuru's Network for the latest updates on Income Tax, GST, Company Law, Corporate Laws and other related subjects. Join Our WhatsApp Group Join Our Telegram Group Review us on Google Related Articles in Goods and Services Tax Bombay HC Quashes GST Bank Attachment for Non-Compliance With Section 83 October 10, 2026 GSTAT Prayagraj Quashes E-Way Bill Penalty Due to Valid E-Invoice, No Tax Evasion and Hearing Violation October 10, 2026 Rule 96 CGST Rules: IGST Export Refunds and Recent Court Decisions October 10, 2026 Fake GST ITC Case: Husband Denied Anticipatory Bail, Wife Granted Relief by Bombay HC October 10, 2026 Kerala HC Quashes Flood Cess Refund Rejection Based on Wrong Limitation Date October 10, 2026 GST Goods Rate and Classification Clarifications: Scrap, Toys, Seeds and Tyres October 9, 2026