Summary: The 57th GST Council meeting has recommended wide-ranging changes affecting GST enforcement, prosecution, refunds, input tax credit, return filing, goods in transit, exports and small taxpayers. According to the meeting summary, the proposals include removal of arrest powers, a higher prosecution threshold, reduced penalties, faster refunds and expanded ITC eligibility for specified expenses. Other recommendations address the Invoice Management System, correction of earlier return periods, restrictions on interception of goods in transit, export treatment of certain cross-border transactions and simplified registration compliance. An optional annual return with quarterly tax payments for eligible small taxpayers has been approved in principle. The note also identifies proposed effective dates of 1 November 2026 and 1 April 2027 for certain refund-related changes. These recommendations are not yet law and will require amendments to the relevant legislation, rules or notifications before taking effect. Taxpayers should monitor the implementing instruments, review accumulated credit and capital expenditure plans, assess pending enforcement matters and preserve documentary evidence supporting ITC claims. 57th GST Council Meeting: What Matters to the Taxpayer: A summary of the key decisions and their practical implications Status of the decisions: None of the decisions summarised below has the force of law yet. Each will take effect only once the Act, the Rules or the relevant notification is amended, and several have been approved only in principle. This note is based solely on the summary report of the meeting. The 57th meeting of the GST Council has recommended a broad set of changes spanning enforcement, refunds, input tax credit, returns and compliance. The key decisions are set out below by subject, followed by the steps taxpayers should consider now. Table of Contents▸ Arrest and Prosecution Refunds Input Tax Credit Returns Goods in Transit Exporters Small Taxpayers Tax Rates What Taxpayers Should Do Now Show all 9 sections Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Arrest and Prosecution The Council has recommended a substantial softening of the penal framework. Arrest: The power of arrest is to be removed. Prosecution threshold: The monetary threshold for prosecution rises from Rs 1 crore to Rs 5 crore. Sentencing: The minimum punishment is to be removed, leaving sentencing to the discretion of the court. General penalty: The general penalty is reduced from Rs 25,000 to Rs 10,000. Procedural defaults: Late filing, errors and payment defaults will attract only recovery, interest and a proportionate penalty. Small amounts: No notice will be issued where the amount involved is below Rs 10,000. How these changes apply to pending matters will depend on the transitional provisions, the terms of which are not yet known. Refunds Inverted duty structure: Refund of accumulated credit under an inverted duty structure is extended to input services, for credit availed on or after 1 November 2026. Capital goods: Plant and machinery are brought back within the scope of refund, both for exports and for inverted rate structures. The refund will be computed at one-sixtieth of the credit per month, for credit availed on or after 1 April 2027. Timelines: Applications are to be acknowledged within 10 days, with 90% of the claim sanctioned provisionally by the system. The final order is due within 3 working days of acknowledgement. Cash ledger: Excess balances in the electronic cash ledger will be refunded automatically. Input Tax Credit Expanded eligibility: Credit is to be allowed on employee health and life insurance, telecom towers, pipelines outside the factory, and free samples, as well as on stock written off where its destruction is required by law. Services resold in the same line of business: Where a service is bought and resold in the same line of business, tax is to be borne only once. This covers hotel accommodation booked through agents up to Rs 7,500 per night, restaurant and catering services, and passenger transport. Bona fide purchasers: Relief for the bona fide purchaser remains under study, with a Committee report due within three months. Until the law changes, purchasers should retain proof of receipt of goods, the invoice and evidence of payment in full. Returns Invoice Management System: Buyers will receive credit through the Invoice Management System, and only what the buyer accepts will enter the return. Downward revisions: A downward revision by the seller will flow through to the buyer. Correction of earlier periods: Errors in earlier periods may be corrected, including an incorrectly entered buyer GSTIN. Goods in Transit Interception: Interception will require specific intelligence and the prior authorisation of an officer not below the rank of Joint Commissioner. Inspection: Only the source and destination States may inspect the goods. States en route may not stop the conveyance. Exporters Foreign branch billing: Supplies billed through a foreign branch are to qualify as exports. Work on foreign clients’ goods: Work carried out in India on goods belonging to a foreign client is to be treated as an export of service. Export proceeds: Realisation of export proceeds is to be governed by RBI rules. Small Taxpayers Registration: Cancellation of registration is to be automated. A registration suspended for a missing return or missing bank details will be restored once the default is cured. Optional annual return: An optional annual return, with quarterly payment of tax, is proposed for taxpayers with turnover up to Rs 5 crore making supplies only to consumers. This has been approved in principle only. Tax Rates Tax rates are unchanged. Going forward, rate changes will be made once a year. What Taxpayers Should Do Now 1. Review unutilised credit and capital expenditure plans against the effective dates of 1 November 2026 and 1 April 2027. 2. Identify any pending notice, summons or prosecution in which the revised limits could provide relief. 3. Keep the evidence file on purchases complete: proof of receipt of goods, invoices and evidence of payment. Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Filed under Goods And Services TaxGSTGST Council Author Info Name: Khanindra Das Qualification: LL.B / Advocate Company: Advocate & CS | Civil, Corporate & Taxation Matters | Customs, International Trade | IBC | Compliance & Contracts | High Court Practitioner Location: Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra Articles Published: 41 View full profile → More from Khanindra Das SARFAESI Enforcement: Stage-Wise Checklist for Borrowers October 7, 2026 Section 17 SARFAESI Act: DRT Powers, Limits, Limitation & Remedies October 7, 2026 Section 14 SARFAESI: Physical Possession and Rights of Property Owner October 7, 2026 Join TaxGuru's Network for the latest updates on Income Tax, GST, Company Law, Corporate Laws and other related subjects. Join Our WhatsApp Group Join Our Telegram Group Review us on Google Related Articles in Goods and Services Tax Supplier’s Subsequent GST Registration Cancellation Alone Does Not Prove Fraudulent ITC: Karnataka HC October 10, 2026 GSTAT Quashes GST Demand Against Deceased Proprietor Under Section 93: GSTAT October 10, 2026 Supreme Court Dismisses ₹25.47 Lakh Tax Appeals Under CBIC Monetary Limits October 10, 2026 57th GST Council Meeting: Legal Reforms, ITC, Refunds and Enforcement October 10, 2026 Section 71 GST Access Powers: Limits, Search Safeguards and Visit Reports October 10, 2026 57th GST Council Meeting: Key Reforms in GST Prosecution, Penalties & Demand Proceedings October 10, 2026