Summary: The 57th GST Council meeting held on 8 October 2026 recommended changes concerning export of services and zero-rating recommendations, eco liability and reverse-charge e-invoicing, delivery services and other service-rate proposals. The Ministry of Finance press release records recommendations and, in some cases, proposals for future circulars, consultation or in-principle approval. It is not itself an amending Act, rule or rate notification. This analysis explains the precise measures described in the release, their relationship with the statutory provisions identified there, and the practical questions that remain unresolved until the implementing instruments are published. Taxpayers should continue to apply the law currently in force and should not change return positions, claim additional credits, discontinue documentation or alter rates merely on the basis of the Council announcement. Table of Contents▸ Background and legal status Export of services and zero-rating recommendations Legal reading and implementation questions ECO liability and reverse-charge e-invoicing Legal reading and implementation questions Delivery services and other service-rate proposals Legal reading and implementation questions Analysis Way forward Key takeaways Frequently Asked Questions Have these Council recommendations come into force? Can a taxpayer rely on the proposed relief in a current return or proceeding? Will every measure commence on the same date? Does the release settle all procedural and documentary conditions? What should advisers do before acting on the announcement? TaxGuru source and related reading Provision-by-provision legal verification and qualifications Export-of-services amendment is narrow Physical availability services SEZ and FTWZ deliveries ECO delivery services RCM e-invoicing Verified TaxGuru internal references Show all 24 sections Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Background and legal status The Council’s 57th meeting concentrated on process reform following earlier rate rationalisation. The press release distinguishes existing portal measures from new statutory or procedural proposals. Council recommendations require the appropriate amendment, notification, rule, circular or portal implementation, as applicable. A suggested implementation date in the release is not proof of commencement. Export of services and zero-rating recommendations Reforms relating to exports/zero rating of supplies of goods and services The GST Council recommended: omission of sub-clause (v) of clause (6) of section 2 of the IGST Act, 2017, so as to remove the condition of supplier and recipient of services not being establishments of a distinct person, under Explanation 1 to section 8 of the IGST Act, 2017, for a supply of services to qualify as an “export of services”. This will facilitate refunds for Indian services providers in respect of services supplied to/through their foreign offices/branches and thus will promote export of services from India. issuance of a circular to clarify various issues related to receipt of payment in foreign exchange or Indian rupees as permissible, for export of goods and services. omission of clause (a) of section 13(3) of IGST Act, 2017, so that the place of supply for services in cases where goods are made physically available by the recipient of services to the supplier, will be determined as per the default provision under section 13(2) of the IGST Act, 2017 i.e. the location of the recipient of such services. This will facilitate access to export-related benefits under GST for Indian service providers providing such services to foreign recipients. insertion of an explanation to section 16(1) of the IGST Act, 2017 to provide that in the cases where goods are supplied to an overseas buyer, but the delivery of goods is made to the said buyer in an SEZ/FTWZ, and the payment for such supply is received in convertible foreign exchange or in Indian Rupees wherever permitted by the RBI, then such a supply will be deemed to be supply of goods to an SEZ/FTWZ. This will provide certainty regarding zero rating benefit to Indian manufacturers making supply of goods for overseas buyers by making delivery to them in an SEZ/FTWZ for warehousing or further processing. Ease of living and doing business Legal reading and implementation questions The recommendation must be tested against the final statutory or delegated instrument: the operative wording, class of eligible persons or supplies, procedural conditions, effective date, and treatment of past periods. Until those elements are notified, this section describes a proposal rather than a presently enforceable entitlement or restriction. ECO liability and reverse-charge e-invoicing The GST Council approved in-principle a concept note for an optional Annual Return Quarterly Payment (ARQP) scheme for taxpayers having an aggregate turnover equal to or less than Rs. 5 Crore in the preceding financial year and engaged exclusively in supplies to unregistered persons (B2C supplies). The Council also made the following recommendations to streamline compliances in GST: amendment in section 16, section 37 and section 39 of the CGST Act, 2017, to align provisions relating to furnishing of statement of outward supply under section 37 and the return under section 39 of the CGST Act, 2017 with the provisions relating to time limit for availment of input tax credit under section 16(4) of the CGST Act, 2017. amendment in section 9(5) of the CGST Act, 2017, to provide clarity regarding liability of the ECO to pay tax for the notified services, irrespective of the business models being followed by him. introduction of a validation clause in CGST Act, 2017, for validation of notices which have been held invalid by various courts on the ground of having been issued for multiple financial years. extending e-invoicing to domestic supplies received from an unregistered person where the tax is payable under reverse charge mechanism, as well as to the import of services, for taxpayers having aggregate annual turnover of Rs. 5 crore and above. Press-release recommendation. The Council approved various amendments to the CGST Act, 2017 and the GSTAT (Appointment and Conditions of Service of President and Members) Rules, 2023 to align the provisions in respect of the GST Appellate Tribunal with the relevant provisions of the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2026 and the National Tribunals Commission and Qualification, Selection and Conditions of Service of Chairpersons and Members of Tribunals Rules, 2026. Legal reading and implementation questions The recommendation must be tested against the final statutory or delegated instrument: the operative wording, class of eligible persons or supplies, procedural conditions, effective date, and treatment of past periods. Until those elements are notified, this section describes a proposal rather than a presently enforceable entitlement or restriction. Delivery services and other service-rate proposals Passenger transport and rental of motor vehicles using Electric Vehicles To provide an option to pay GST at the rate of 5%, with restricted input tax credit, on passenger transport services and rental services of motor vehicles with operators, where the service is supplied using an electric vehicle, and the cost of battery charging is included in the consideration. Transportation and delivery services supplied through Electronic Commerce Operators To bring delivery services, other than courier and postal, supplied through an ECO under Section 9 (5) of CGST Act, 2017, where the person supplying such services is not liable for registration under Section 22 (1) of the CGST Act, 2017 and to prescribe GST rate of 5% without ITC for such delivery services; To prescribe a GST rate of 5% without ITC for delivery services in relation to goods where such goods are supplied/ordered through an ECO; To exclude the GST exemption on the services of transportation of goods to unregistered persons by GTA under Entry 21A of Notification No. 12/2017-Central Tax (Rate), where such services are in relation to goods which are supplied/ordered through an ECO. Motor vehicle leasing transactions To clarify the GST treatment of certain statutory and ancillary recoveries such as registration charges, road tax, insurance and FASTag charges incurred by the lessor which are subsequently recovered from the lessee in connection with the leasing of motor vehicles. Legal reading and implementation questions The recommendation must be tested against the final statutory or delegated instrument: the operative wording, class of eligible persons or supplies, procedural conditions, effective date, and treatment of past periods. Until those elements are notified, this section describes a proposal rather than a presently enforceable entitlement or restriction. Analysis The proposal to remove the distinct-person condition for export of services is a proposed change to section 2(6) of the IGST Act, not a declaration that all inter-office services are exports. Other export conditions and the ultimate statutory wording remain material. The proposal on goods delivered to an SEZ or FTWZ for an overseas buyer has specified payment and delivery elements. E-commerce operator liability and e-invoicing are distinct issues and must not be conflated. Way forward First, identify the relevant Act amendment, rule amendment, rate notification or circular when issued. Second, compare its wording with the Council announcement; the final text may narrow, qualify or stage the measure. Third, confirm the commencement clause and any retrospective or transitional provision. Fourth, update compliance procedures only after checking whether portal changes, prescribed forms and administrative instructions are available. Key takeaways The 8 October 2026 press release is the primary source for the proposals discussed here. A recommendation, in-principle approval or proposed circular does not itself change the operative law. Where the release identifies thresholds, dates or exceptions, the final legal text must be checked before applying them. Existing statutory filing, payment, record-keeping and appeal obligations continue until lawfully changed. Frequently Asked Questions Have these Council recommendations come into force? Not merely by publication of the press release. The applicable amendments, notifications, rules or circulars and their commencement provisions must be examined. Can a taxpayer rely on the proposed relief in a current return or proceeding? Only if the relevant legal instrument is effective and the taxpayer satisfies its conditions. The announcement alone is insufficient. Will every measure commence on the same date? The release refers to different proposed implementation arrangements. Each measure must be checked separately against its eventual legal instrument. Does the release settle all procedural and documentary conditions? No. Several recommendations expressly contemplate further rule changes, circulars, portal modifications or consultation. What should advisers do before acting on the announcement? Maintain the current-law position, identify the specific recommendation, and track the final text, commencement and any transitional provision. TaxGuru source and related reading Principal press release: 57th GST Council Meeting – TaxGuru Provision-by-provision legal verification and qualifications Export-of-services amendment is narrow Proposed deletion of section 2(6)(v) of IGST Act concerns the distinct-person establishment condition. Other export conditions (recipient location, place of supply and consideration) remain relevant unless separately amended. Physical availability services Proposed deletion of section 13(3)(a) would generally shift the covered services to section 13(2) recipient-location default, subject to final text and other place-of-supply rules. SEZ and FTWZ deliveries The proposed explanation to section 16(1) concerns supplies to overseas buyers delivered to the buyer in SEZ/FTWZ and paid in permitted foreign exchange/INR. It is not a general zero-rating rule for all warehousing. ECO delivery services The release distinguishes section 9(5) liability for certain delivery services supplied through ECOs, the proposed 5% without ITC rate for delivery of goods ordered through ECOs, and a related GTA exemption exclusion. These are different conditions. RCM e-invoicing The proposed expansion is for taxpayers with aggregate annual turnover of ₹5 crore and above for specified domestic unregistered-supplier RCM supplies and imports of services; exact document scope awaits implementation. Verified TaxGuru internal references Primary source: 57th GST Council recommendations as published on TaxGuru Related analysis: Export of services under section 2(6)(v) Related analysis: Export-of-services distinct-person clarification Related analysis: Zero-rating and SEZ transactions Related analysis: E-commerce operator liability under section 9(5) Related analysis: E-invoicing and reverse-charge transactions Related analysis: Section 54 refund framework ***** Disclaimer: This article is an editorial explanation of the recommendations recorded in the Ministry of Finance press release dated 8 October 2026. It is not a statement that any proposed amendment has commenced. Readers must verify the relevant enacted law, notifications, rules, circulars and judicial developments before acting. TaxGuru accepts no responsibility for decisions taken solely on the basis of this article. Advertisement (adsbygoogle = window.adsbygoogle || []).push({}); Filed under Goods And Services TaxGSTGST CouncilSEZ Author Info Name: CA Sandeep Kanoi Qualification: CA in Job / Business Company: Taxguru Consultancy Location: Mumbai, Maharashtra Articles Published: 21,504 View full profile → More from CA Sandeep Kanoi GST Arrest Grounds Must Be Recorded in Writing: Madras HC Upholds Bail October 9, 2026 Fake GST ITC of ₹23 Crore: Bombay HC Rejects Anticipatory Bail October 9, 2026 ₹29.7 Crore Fake GST ITC: Bombay HC Denies Anticipatory Bail October 9, 2026 Join TaxGuru's Network for the latest updates on Income Tax, GST, Company Law, Corporate Laws and other related subjects. Join Our WhatsApp Group Join Our Telegram Group Review us on Google Related Articles in Goods and Services Tax GST Arrest Grounds Must Be Recorded in Writing: Madras HC Upholds Bail October 9, 2026 Fake GST ITC of ₹23 Crore: Bombay HC Rejects Anticipatory Bail October 9, 2026 ₹29.7 Crore Fake GST ITC: Bombay HC Denies Anticipatory Bail October 9, 2026 ₹300 Crore Fake GST Invoices: Bombay HC Rejects Anticipatory Bail October 9, 2026 ₹13 Crore Fake GST ITC: Bombay HC Rejects Anticipatory Bail October 9, 2026 SC Bars Simultaneous CST Exemptions Under Two Notifications for Same Assessment Year October 9, 2026